README.md, before:

<img src="https://swift.org/assets/images/swift.svg" alt="Swift logo" height="70" >

# Swift Programming Language


| | **Architecture** | **Master** | **Package** |
|---|:---:|:---:|:---:|
| **macOS**        | x86_64 |[![Build Status](https://ci.swift.org/job/oss-swift-incremental-RA-osx/lastCompletedBuild/badge/icon)](https://ci.swift.org/job/oss-swift-incremental-RA-osx)|[![Build Status](https://ci.swift.org/job/oss-swift-package-osx/lastCompletedBuild/badge/icon)](https://ci.swift.org/job/oss-swift-package-osx)|
| **Ubuntu 14.04** | x86_64 | [![Build Status](https://ci.swift.org/job/oss-swift-incremental-RA-linux-ubuntu-14_04/lastCompletedBuild/badge/icon)](https://ci.swift.org/job/oss-swift-incremental-RA-linux-ubuntu-14_04)|[![Build Status](https://ci.swift.org/job/oss-swift-package-linux-ubuntu-14_04/lastCompletedBuild/badge/icon)](https://ci.swift.org/job/oss-swift-package-linux-ubuntu-14_04)|
| **Ubuntu 16.04** | x86_64 | [![Build Status](https://ci.swift.org/job/oss-swift-incremental-RA-linux-ubuntu-16_04/lastCompletedBuild/badge/icon)](https://ci.swift.org/job/oss-swift-incremental-RA-linux-ubuntu-16_04)|[![Build Status](https://ci.swift.org/job/oss-swift-package-linux-ubuntu-16_04/lastCompletedBuild/badge/icon)](https://ci.swift.org/job/oss-swift-package-linux-ubuntu-16_04)|
| **Ubuntu 18.04** | x86_64 | [![Build Status](https://ci.swift.org/job/oss-swift-incremental-RA-linux-ubuntu-18_04/lastCompletedBuild/badge/icon)](https://ci.swift.org/job/oss-swift-incremental-RA-linux-ubuntu-18_04)|[![Build Status](https://ci.swift.org/job/oss-swift-package-linux-ubuntu-18_04/lastCompletedBuild/badge/icon)](https://ci.swift.org/job/oss-swift-package-linux-ubuntu-18_04)|

**Swift Community-Hosted CI Platforms**

| **OS** | **Architecture** | **Build** |
|---|:---:|:---:|
|**[Debian 9.1 (Raspberry Pi)](https://github.com/apple/swift-community-hosted-continuous-integration/blob/master/nodes/armv7_debian_stretch.json)** | ARMv7 | [![Build Status](https://ci-external.swift.org/job/oss-swift-RA-linux-debian-9_1/lastCompletedBuild/badge/icon)](https://ci-external.swift.org/job/oss-swift-RA-linux-debian-9_1)|
|**[Fedora 27](https://github.com/apple/swift-community-hosted-continuous-integration/blob/master/nodes/x86_64_fedora_27.json)** | x86_64 |[![Build Status](https://ci-external.swift.org/job/oss-swift-RA-linux-fedora-27/lastCompletedBuild/badge/icon)](https://ci-external.swift.org/job/oss-swift-RA-linux-fedora-27)|
|**[Ubuntu 16.04](https://github.com/apple/swift-community-hosted-continuous-integration/blob/master/nodes/x86_64_ubuntu_16_04.json)** | x86_64 |[![Build Status](https://ci-external.swift.org/job/oss-swift-RA-linux-ubuntu-16.04/lastCompletedBuild/badge/icon)](https://ci-external.swift.org/job/oss-swift-RA-linux-ubuntu-16.04)|
|**[Ubuntu 16.04 ](https://github.com/apple/swift-community-hosted-continuous-integration/blob/master/nodes/ppc64le_ubuntu_16_04.json)** | PPC64LE |[![Build Status](https://ci-external.swift.org/job/oss-swift-4.1-RA-linux-ubuntu-16.04-ppc64le/lastCompletedBuild/badge/icon)](https://ci-external.swift.org/job/oss-swift-4.1-RA-linux-ubuntu-16.04-ppc64le)|
|**[Ubuntu 16.04 ](https://github.com/apple/swift-community-hosted-continuous-integration/blob/master/nodes/aarch64_ubuntu_16.04.json)** | AArch64 |[![Build Status](https://ci-external.swift.org/job/oss-swift-RA-linux-ubuntu-16.04-aarch64/lastCompletedBuild/badge/icon)](https://ci-external.swift.org/job/oss-swift-RA-linux-ubuntu-16.04-aarch64)|
|**[Ubuntu 16.04 (Android)](https://github.com/apple/swift-community-hosted-continuous-integration/blob/master/nodes/x86_64_ubuntu_16_04_LTS_android.json)** | x86_64 |[![Build Status](https://ci-external.swift.org/job/oss-swift-RA-linux-ubuntu-16.04-android/lastCompletedBuild/badge/icon)](https://ci-external.swift.org/job/oss-swift-RA-linux-ubuntu-16.04-android)|
|**[Ubuntu 16.04 (TensorFlow)](https://github.com/apple/swift-community-hosted-continuous-integration/blob/master/nodes/x86_64_ubuntu_16_04_tensorflow.json)** | x86_64 |[![Build Status](https://ci-external.swift.org/job/oss-swift-RA-linux-ubuntu-16.04-tensorflow/lastCompletedBuild/badge/icon)](https://ci-external.swift.org/job/oss-swift-RA-linux-ubuntu-16.04-tensorflow)|
|**[macOS 10.13 (TensorFlow)](https://github.com/apple/swift-community-hosted-continuous-integration/blob/master/nodes/x86_64_macos_high_sierra_tensorflow.json)** | x86_64 |[![Build Status](https://ci-external.swift.org/job/oss-swift-RA-macOS-tensorflow/lastCompletedBuild/badge/icon)](https://ci-external.swift.org/job/oss-swift-RA-macOS-tensorflow)|
|**[Ubuntu 16.04 (TensorFlow with GPU)](https://github.com/apple/swift-community-hosted-continuous-integration/blob/master/nodes/x86_64_ubuntu_16_04_tensorflow_gpu.json)** | x86_64 |[![Build Status](https://ci-external.swift.org/job/oss-swift-RA-linux-ubuntu-16.04-tensorflow-gpu/lastCompletedBuild/badge/icon)](https://ci-external.swift.org/job/oss-swift-RA-linux-ubuntu-16.04-tensorflow-gpu)|
|**[Debian 9.5](https://github.com/apple/swift-community-hosted-continuous-integration/blob/master/nodes/x86_64_debian_9.5.json)** | x86_64 | [![Build Status](https://ci-external.swift.org/job/oss-swift-RA-linux-debian-9_5/lastCompletedBuild/badge/icon)](https://ci-external.swift.org/job/oss-swift-RA-linux-debian-9_5)|


## Welcome to Swift

Swift is a high-performance system programming language.  It has a clean
and modern syntax, offers seamless access to existing C and Objective-C code
and frameworks, and is memory safe by default.

Although inspired by Objective-C and many other languages, Swift is not itself a
C-derived language. As a complete and independent language, Swift packages core
features like flow control, data structures, and functions, with high-level
constructs like objects, protocols, closures, and generics. Swift embraces
modules, eliminating the need for headers and the code duplication they entail.

To learn more about the programming language, visit [swift.org](https://swift.org/documentation/).

## Contributing to Swift

Contributions to Swift are welcomed and encouraged! Please see the
[Contributing to Swift guide](https://swift.org/contributing/).

To be a truly great community, [Swift.org](https://swift.org/) needs to welcome
developers from all walks of life, with different backgrounds, and with a wide
range of experience. A diverse and friendly community will have more great
ideas, more unique perspectives, and produce more great code. We will work
diligently to make the Swift community welcoming to everyone.

To give clarity of what is expected of our members, Swift has adopted the
code of conduct defined by the Contributor Covenant. This document is used
across many open source communities, and we think it articulates our values
well. For more, see the [Code of Conduct](https://swift.org/community/#code-of-conduct).

## Getting Started

These instructions give the most direct path to a working Swift development
environment. To build from source you will need about 2 GB of disk space for the
source code and up to 70 GB of disk space for the build artifacts with full
debugging. Depending on your machine, a clean build can take a few minutes to
several hours. Naturally, incremental builds are much faster.


### System Requirements

macOS, Ubuntu Linux LTS, and the latest Ubuntu Linux release are the current
supported host development operating systems.

#### macOS

To build for macOS, you need [Xcode 10.0](https://developer.apple.com/xcode/downloads/).
The required version of Xcode changes frequently, and is often a beta release.
Check this document or the host information on <https://ci.swift.org> for the
current required version.

You will also need [CMake](https://cmake.org) and [Ninja](https://ninja-build.org),
which can be installed via a package manager:

**[Homebrew](https://brew.sh/)**

    brew install cmake ninja

**[MacPorts](https://macports.org)**

    sudo port install cmake ninja

Instructions for installing CMake and Ninja directly can be found [below](#build-dependencies).

#### Linux

For Ubuntu, you'll need the following development dependencies:

    sudo apt-get install git cmake ninja-build clang python uuid-dev libicu-dev icu-devtools libbsd-dev libedit-dev libxml2-dev libsqlite3-dev swig libpython-dev libncurses5-dev pkg-config libblocksruntime-dev libcurl4-openssl-dev systemtap-sdt-dev tzdata rsync

**Note:** LLDB currently requires at least `swig-1.3.40` but will successfully build
with version 2 shipped with Ubuntu.

Build instructions for Ubuntu 14.04 LTS can be found [here](docs/Ubuntu14.md).

### Getting Sources for Swift and Related Projects

First create a directory for all of the Swift sources:

    mkdir swift-source
    cd swift-source

**Note:** This is important since update-checkout (see below) checks out
repositories next to the Swift source directory. This means that if one clones
Swift and has other unrelated repositories, update-checkout may not clone those
repositories and will update them instead.

**Via HTTPS**  For those checking out sources as read-only, HTTPS works best:

    git clone https://github.com/apple/swift.git
    ./swift/utils/update-checkout --clone

**Via SSH**  For those who plan on regularly making direct commits,
cloning over SSH may provide a better experience (which requires
[uploading SSH keys to GitHub](https://help.github.com/articles/adding-a-new-ssh-key-to-your-github-account/)):

    git clone git@github.com:apple/swift.git
    ./swift/utils/update-checkout --clone-with-ssh

### Building Swift

The `build-script` is a high-level build automation script that supports basic
options such as building a Swift-compatible LLDB, building the Swift Package
Manager, building for various platforms, running tests after builds, and more.

There are two primary build systems to use: Xcode and Ninja. The Xcode build
system allows you to work in Xcode, but Ninja is a bit faster and supports
more environments.

To build using Ninja, run:

    utils/build-script --release-debuginfo

When developing Swift, it helps to build what you're working on in a debug
configuration while building the rest of the project with optimizations. Below
are some examples of using debug variants:

    utils/build-script --release-debuginfo --debug-swift # Swift frontend built in debug
    utils/build-script --release-debuginfo --debug-swift-stdlib # Standard library built in debug
    utils/build-script --release-debuginfo --debug-swift --force-optimized-typechecker # Swift frontend sans type checker built in debug

Limiting the amount of debug code in the compiler has a very large impact on
Swift compile times, and in turn the test execution time. If you want to build
the entire project in debug, you can run:

    utils/build-script --debug

For documentation of all available arguments, as well as additional usage
information, see the inline help:

    utils/build-script -h

#### Xcode

To build using Xcode, specify the `--xcode` argument on any of the above commands.
Xcode can be used to edit the Swift source code, but it is not currently
fully supported as a build environment for SDKs other than macOS. The generated
Xcode project does not integrate with the test runner, but the tests can be run
with the 'check-swift' target.

#### Build Products

All of the build products are placed in `swift-source/build/${TOOL}-${MODE}/${PRODUCT}-${PLATFORM}/`.
If macOS Swift with Ninja in DebugAssert mode was built, all of the products
would be in `swift-source/build/Ninja-DebugAssert/swift-macosx-x86_64/`. It
helps to save this directory as an environment variable for future use.

    export SWIFT_BUILD_DIR="~/swift-source/build/Ninja-DebugAssert/swift-macosx-x86_64"

#### Ninja

Once the first build has completed, Ninja can perform fast incremental builds of
various products. These incremental builds are a big timesaver when developing
and debugging.

    cd ${SWIFT_BUILD_DIR}
    ninja swift

This will build the Swift compiler, but will not rebuild the standard library or
any other target. Building the `swift-stdlib` target as an additional layer of
testing from time to time is also a good idea. To build just the standard
library, run:

    ninja swift-stdlib

It is always a good idea to do a full build after using `update-checkout`.

#### Using Xcode

To open the Swift project in Xcode, open `${SWIFT_BUILD_DIR}/Swift.xcodeproj`.
It will auto-create a *lot* of schemes for all of the available targets. A
common debug flow would involve:

 - Select the 'swift' scheme.
 - Pull up the scheme editor (⌘⇧<).
 - Select the 'Arguments' tab and click the '+'.
 - Add the command line options.
 - Close the scheme editor.
 - Build and run.

Another option is to change the scheme to "Wait for executable to be launched",
then run the build product in Terminal.

### Swift Toolchains

#### Building

Swift toolchains are created using the script
[build-toolchain](https://github.com/apple/swift/blob/master/utils/build-toolchain). This
script is used by swift.org's CI to produce snapshots and can allow for one to
locally reproduce such builds for development or distribution purposes. E.x.:

```
  $ ./utils/build-toolchain $TOOLCHAIN_PREFIX
```

where ``$TOOLCHAIN_PREFIX`` is a string that will be prepended to the swift
package name in the produced tar ball. For instance, if ``$TOOLCHAIN_PREFIX``
was ``macOS``, the produced archive will have the name
``swift-macOS.tar.gz``.

Beyond building the toolchain, ``build-toolchain`` also supports the following
(non-exhaustive) set of useful options::

- ``--dry-run``: Perform a dry run build. This is off by default.
- ``--test``: Test the toolchain after it has been compiled. This is off by default.
- ``--distcc``: Use distcc to speed up the build by distributing the c++ part of
  the swift build. This is off by default.

More options may be added over time. Please pass ``--help`` to
``build-toolchain`` to see the full set of options.

#### Installing into Xcode

On macOS if one wants to install such a toolchain into Xcode:

1. Untar and copy the toolchain to one of `/Library/Developer/Toolchains/` or
   `~/Library/Developer/Toolchains/`. E.x.:

```
  $ tar -xzf swift-macOS.tar.gz -C /
  $ tar -xzf swift-macOS.tar.gz -C ~/
```

2. Specify the local toolchain for Xcode's use via `Xcode->Toolchains`.

### Build Failures

Make sure you are using the [correct release](#macos) of Xcode.

If you have changed Xcode versions but still encounter errors that appear to
be related to the Xcode version, try passing `--clean` to `build-script`.

When a new version of Xcode is released, you can update your build without
recompiling the entire project by passing the `--reconfigure` option.

Make sure all repositories are up to date with the `update-checkout` command
described above.

## Testing Swift

See [docs/Testing.md](docs/Testing.md), in particular the section on [lit.py](docs/Testing.md#using-litpy).

## Learning More

Be sure to look through the [docs](https://github.com/apple/swift/tree/master/docs)
directory for more information about the compiler. In particular, the documents
titled [Debugging the Swift Compiler](docs/DebuggingTheCompiler.rst) and
[Continuous Integration for Swift](docs/ContinuousIntegration.md) are very
helpful to understand before submitting your first PR.

### Building Documentation

To read the compiler documentation, start by installing the
[Sphinx](http://sphinx-doc.org) documentation generator tool by running the
command:

    easy_install -U Sphinx

Once complete, you can build the Swift documentation by changing directory into
[docs](https://github.com/apple/swift/tree/master/docs) and typing `make`. This
compiles the `.rst` files in the [docs](https://github.com/apple/swift/tree/master/docs)
directory into HTML in the `docs/_build/html` directory.

Many of the docs are out of date, but you can see some historical design
documents in the `docs` directory.

Another source of documentation is the standard library itself, located in
`stdlib`. Much of the language is actually implemented in the library
(including `Int`), and the standard library gives some examples of what can be
expressed today.

## Build Dependencies

### CMake
[CMake](https://cmake.org) is the core infrastructure used to configure builds of 
Swift and its companion projects; at least version 3.4.3 is required. 

On macOS, you can download the [CMake Binary Distribution](https://cmake.org/download),
bundled as an application, copy it to `/Applications`, and add the embedded
command line tools to your `PATH`:

    export PATH=/Applications/CMake.app/Contents/bin:$PATH

On Linux, if you have not already installed Swift's [development
dependencies](#linux), you can download and install the CMake
package separately using the following command:

    sudo apt-get install cmake


### Ninja
[Ninja](https://ninja-build.org) is the current recommended build system
for building Swift and is the default configuration generated by CMake. [Pre-built
packages](https://github.com/ninja-build/ninja/wiki/Pre-built-Ninja-packages)
are available for macOS and Linux distributions. You can also clone Ninja
next to the other projects and it will be bootstrapped automatically:

**Via HTTPS**

    git clone https://github.com/ninja-build/ninja.git && cd ninja
    git checkout release
    cat README

**Via SSH**

    git clone git@github.com:ninja-build/ninja.git && cd ninja
    git checkout release
    cat README

Commit message:

Fix-up toolchain script description.

README.md, after:

<img src="https://swift.org/assets/images/swift.svg" alt="Swift logo" height="70" >

# Swift Programming Language


| | **Architecture** | **Master** | **Package** |
|---|:---:|:---:|:---:|
| **macOS**        | x86_64 |[![Build Status](https://ci.swift.org/job/oss-swift-incremental-RA-osx/lastCompletedBuild/badge/icon)](https://ci.swift.org/job/oss-swift-incremental-RA-osx)|[![Build Status](https://ci.swift.org/job/oss-swift-package-osx/lastCompletedBuild/badge/icon)](https://ci.swift.org/job/oss-swift-package-osx)|
| **Ubuntu 14.04** | x86_64 | [![Build Status](https://ci.swift.org/job/oss-swift-incremental-RA-linux-ubuntu-14_04/lastCompletedBuild/badge/icon)](https://ci.swift.org/job/oss-swift-incremental-RA-linux-ubuntu-14_04)|[![Build Status](https://ci.swift.org/job/oss-swift-package-linux-ubuntu-14_04/lastCompletedBuild/badge/icon)](https://ci.swift.org/job/oss-swift-package-linux-ubuntu-14_04)|
| **Ubuntu 16.04** | x86_64 | [![Build Status](https://ci.swift.org/job/oss-swift-incremental-RA-linux-ubuntu-16_04/lastCompletedBuild/badge/icon)](https://ci.swift.org/job/oss-swift-incremental-RA-linux-ubuntu-16_04)|[![Build Status](https://ci.swift.org/job/oss-swift-package-linux-ubuntu-16_04/lastCompletedBuild/badge/icon)](https://ci.swift.org/job/oss-swift-package-linux-ubuntu-16_04)|
| **Ubuntu 18.04** | x86_64 | [![Build Status](https://ci.swift.org/job/oss-swift-incremental-RA-linux-ubuntu-18_04/lastCompletedBuild/badge/icon)](https://ci.swift.org/job/oss-swift-incremental-RA-linux-ubuntu-18_04)|[![Build Status](https://ci.swift.org/job/oss-swift-package-linux-ubuntu-18_04/lastCompletedBuild/badge/icon)](https://ci.swift.org/job/oss-swift-package-linux-ubuntu-18_04)|

**Swift Community-Hosted CI Platforms**

| **OS** | **Architecture** | **Build** |
|---|:---:|:---:|
|**[Debian 9.1 (Raspberry Pi)](https://github.com/apple/swift-community-hosted-continuous-integration/blob/master/nodes/armv7_debian_stretch.json)** | ARMv7 | [![Build Status](https://ci-external.swift.org/job/oss-swift-RA-linux-debian-9_1/lastCompletedBuild/badge/icon)](https://ci-external.swift.org/job/oss-swift-RA-linux-debian-9_1)|
|**[Fedora 27](https://github.com/apple/swift-community-hosted-continuous-integration/blob/master/nodes/x86_64_fedora_27.json)** | x86_64 |[![Build Status](https://ci-external.swift.org/job/oss-swift-RA-linux-fedora-27/lastCompletedBuild/badge/icon)](https://ci-external.swift.org/job/oss-swift-RA-linux-fedora-27)|
|**[Ubuntu 16.04](https://github.com/apple/swift-community-hosted-continuous-integration/blob/master/nodes/x86_64_ubuntu_16_04.json)** | x86_64 |[![Build Status](https://ci-external.swift.org/job/oss-swift-RA-linux-ubuntu-16.04/lastCompletedBuild/badge/icon)](https://ci-external.swift.org/job/oss-swift-RA-linux-ubuntu-16.04)|
|**[Ubuntu 16.04 ](https://github.com/apple/swift-community-hosted-continuous-integration/blob/master/nodes/ppc64le_ubuntu_16_04.json)** | PPC64LE |[![Build Status](https://ci-external.swift.org/job/oss-swift-4.1-RA-linux-ubuntu-16.04-ppc64le/lastCompletedBuild/badge/icon)](https://ci-external.swift.org/job/oss-swift-4.1-RA-linux-ubuntu-16.04-ppc64le)|
|**[Ubuntu 16.04 ](https://github.com/apple/swift-community-hosted-continuous-integration/blob/master/nodes/aarch64_ubuntu_16.04.json)** | AArch64 |[![Build Status](https://ci-external.swift.org/job/oss-swift-RA-linux-ubuntu-16.04-aarch64/lastCompletedBuild/badge/icon)](https://ci-external.swift.org/job/oss-swift-RA-linux-ubuntu-16.04-aarch64)|
|**[Ubuntu 16.04 (Android)](https://github.com/apple/swift-community-hosted-continuous-integration/blob/master/nodes/x86_64_ubuntu_16_04_LTS_android.json)** | x86_64 |[![Build Status](https://ci-external.swift.org/job/oss-swift-RA-linux-ubuntu-16.04-android/lastCompletedBuild/badge/icon)](https://ci-external.swift.org/job/oss-swift-RA-linux-ubuntu-16.04-android)|
|**[Ubuntu 16.04 (TensorFlow)](https://github.com/apple/swift-community-hosted-continuous-integration/blob/master/nodes/x86_64_ubuntu_16_04_tensorflow.json)** | x86_64 |[![Build Status](https://ci-external.swift.org/job/oss-swift-RA-linux-ubuntu-16.04-tensorflow/lastCompletedBuild/badge/icon)](https://ci-external.swift.org/job/oss-swift-RA-linux-ubuntu-16.04-tensorflow)|
|**[macOS 10.13 (TensorFlow)](https://github.com/apple/swift-community-hosted-continuous-integration/blob/master/nodes/x86_64_macos_high_sierra_tensorflow.json)** | x86_64 |[![Build Status](https://ci-external.swift.org/job/oss-swift-RA-macOS-tensorflow/lastCompletedBuild/badge/icon)](https://ci-external.swift.org/job/oss-swift-RA-macOS-tensorflow)|
|**[Ubuntu 16.04 (TensorFlow with GPU)](https://github.com/apple/swift-community-hosted-continuous-integration/blob/master/nodes/x86_64_ubuntu_16_04_tensorflow_gpu.json)** | x86_64 |[![Build Status](https://ci-external.swift.org/job/oss-swift-RA-linux-ubuntu-16.04-tensorflow-gpu/lastCompletedBuild/badge/icon)](https://ci-external.swift.org/job/oss-swift-RA-linux-ubuntu-16.04-tensorflow-gpu)|
|**[Debian 9.5](https://github.com/apple/swift-community-hosted-continuous-integration/blob/master/nodes/x86_64_debian_9.5.json)** | x86_64 | [![Build Status](https://ci-external.swift.org/job/oss-swift-RA-linux-debian-9_5/lastCompletedBuild/badge/icon)](https://ci-external.swift.org/job/oss-swift-RA-linux-debian-9_5)|


## Welcome to Swift

Swift is a high-performance system programming language.  It has a clean
and modern syntax, offers seamless access to existing C and Objective-C code
and frameworks, and is memory safe by default.

Although inspired by Objective-C and many other languages, Swift is not itself a
C-derived language. As a complete and independent language, Swift packages core
features like flow control, data structures, and functions, with high-level
constructs like objects, protocols, closures, and generics. Swift embraces
modules, eliminating the need for headers and the code duplication they entail.

To learn more about the programming language, visit [swift.org](https://swift.org/documentation/).

## Contributing to Swift

Contributions to Swift are welcomed and encouraged! Please see the
[Contributing to Swift guide](https://swift.org/contributing/).

To be a truly great community, [Swift.org](https://swift.org/) needs to welcome
developers from all walks of life, with different backgrounds, and with a wide
range of experience. A diverse and friendly community will have more great
ideas, more unique perspectives, and produce more great code. We will work
diligently to make the Swift community welcoming to everyone.

To give clarity of what is expected of our members, Swift has adopted the
code of conduct defined by the Contributor Covenant. This document is used
across many open source communities, and we think it articulates our values
well. For more, see the [Code of Conduct](https://swift.org/community/#code-of-conduct).

## Getting Started

These instructions give the most direct path to a working Swift development
environment. To build from source you will need about 2 GB of disk space for the
source code and up to 70 GB of disk space for the build artifacts with full
debugging. Depending on your machine, a clean build can take a few minutes to
several hours. Naturally, incremental builds are much faster.


### System Requirements

macOS, Ubuntu Linux LTS, and the latest Ubuntu Linux release are the current
supported host development operating systems.

#### macOS

To build for macOS, you need [Xcode 10.0](https://developer.apple.com/xcode/downloads/).
The required version of Xcode changes frequently, and is often a beta release.
Check this document or the host information on <https://ci.swift.org> for the
current required version.

You will also need [CMake](https://cmake.org) and [Ninja](https://ninja-build.org),
which can be installed via a package manager:

**[Homebrew](https://brew.sh/)**

    brew install cmake ninja

**[MacPorts](https://macports.org)**

    sudo port install cmake ninja

Instructions for installing CMake and Ninja directly can be found [below](#build-dependencies).

#### Linux

For Ubuntu, you'll need the following development dependencies:

    sudo apt-get install git cmake ninja-build clang python uuid-dev libicu-dev icu-devtools libbsd-dev libedit-dev libxml2-dev libsqlite3-dev swig libpython-dev libncurses5-dev pkg-config libblocksruntime-dev libcurl4-openssl-dev systemtap-sdt-dev tzdata rsync

**Note:** LLDB currently requires at least `swig-1.3.40` but will successfully build
with version 2 shipped with Ubuntu.

Build instructions for Ubuntu 14.04 LTS can be found [here](docs/Ubuntu14.md).

### Getting Sources for Swift and Related Projects

First create a directory for all of the Swift sources:

    mkdir swift-source
    cd swift-source

**Note:** This is important since update-checkout (see below) checks out
repositories next to the Swift source directory. This means that if one clones
Swift and has other unrelated repositories, update-checkout may not clone those
repositories and will update them instead.

**Via HTTPS**  For those checking out sources as read-only, HTTPS works best:

    git clone https://github.com/apple/swift.git
    ./swift/utils/update-checkout --clone

**Via SSH**  For those who plan on regularly making direct commits,
cloning over SSH may provide a better experience (which requires
[uploading SSH keys to GitHub](https://help.github.com/articles/adding-a-new-ssh-key-to-your-github-account/)):

    git clone git@github.com:apple/swift.git
    ./swift/utils/update-checkout --clone-with-ssh

### Building Swift

The `build-script` is a high-level build automation script that supports basic
options such as building a Swift-compatible LLDB, building the Swift Package
Manager, building for various platforms, running tests after builds, and more.

There are two primary build systems to use: Xcode and Ninja. The Xcode build
system allows you to work in Xcode, but Ninja is a bit faster and supports
more environments.

To build using Ninja, run:

    utils/build-script --release-debuginfo

When developing Swift, it helps to build what you're working on in a debug
configuration while building the rest of the project with optimizations. Below
are some examples of using debug variants:

    utils/build-script --release-debuginfo --debug-swift # Swift frontend built in debug
    utils/build-script --release-debuginfo --debug-swift-stdlib # Standard library built in debug
    utils/build-script --release-debuginfo --debug-swift --force-optimized-typechecker # Swift frontend sans type checker built in debug

Limiting the amount of debug code in the compiler has a very large impact on
Swift compile times, and in turn the test execution time. If you want to build
the entire project in debug, you can run:

    utils/build-script --debug

For documentation of all available arguments, as well as additional usage
information, see the inline help:

    utils/build-script -h

#### Xcode

To build using Xcode, specify the `--xcode` argument on any of the above commands.
Xcode can be used to edit the Swift source code, but it is not currently
fully supported as a build environment for SDKs other than macOS. The generated
Xcode project does not integrate with the test runner, but the tests can be run
with the 'check-swift' target.

#### Build Products

All of the build products are placed in `swift-source/build/${TOOL}-${MODE}/${PRODUCT}-${PLATFORM}/`.
If macOS Swift with Ninja in DebugAssert mode was built, all of the products
would be in `swift-source/build/Ninja-DebugAssert/swift-macosx-x86_64/`. It
helps to save this directory as an environment variable for future use.

    export SWIFT_BUILD_DIR="~/swift-source/build/Ninja-DebugAssert/swift-macosx-x86_64"

#### Ninja

Once the first build has completed, Ninja can perform fast incremental builds of
various products. These incremental builds are a big timesaver when developing
and debugging.

    cd ${SWIFT_BUILD_DIR}
    ninja swift

This will build the Swift compiler, but will not rebuild the standard library or
any other target. Building the `swift-stdlib` target as an additional layer of
testing from time to time is also a good idea. To build just the standard
library, run:

    ninja swift-stdlib

It is always a good idea to do a full build after using `update-checkout`.

#### Using Xcode

To open the Swift project in Xcode, open `${SWIFT_BUILD_DIR}/Swift.xcodeproj`.
It will auto-create a *lot* of schemes for all of the available targets. A
common debug flow would involve:

 - Select the 'swift' scheme.
 - Pull up the scheme editor (⌘⇧<).
 - Select the 'Arguments' tab and click the '+'.
 - Add the command line options.
 - Close the scheme editor.
 - Build and run.

Another option is to change the scheme to "Wait for executable to be launched",
then run the build product in Terminal.

### Swift Toolchains

#### Building

Swift toolchains are created using the script
[build-toolchain](https://github.com/apple/swift/blob/master/utils/build-toolchain). This
script is used by swift.org's CI to produce snapshots and can allow for one to
locally reproduce such builds for development or distribution purposes. E.x.:

```
  $ ./utils/build-toolchain $BUNDLE_PREFIX
```

where ``$BUNDLE_PREFIX`` is a string that will be prepended to the build 
date to give the bundle identifier of the toolchain's ``Info.plist``. For 
instance, if ``$BUNDLE_PREFIX`` was ``com.example``, the toolchain 
produced will have the bundle identifier ``com.example.YYYYMMDD``. It 
will be created in the directory you run the script with a filename 
of the form: ``swift-LOCAL-YYYY-MM-DD-a-osx.tar.gz``.

Beyond building the toolchain, ``build-toolchain`` also supports the 
following (non-exhaustive) set of useful options::

- ``--dry-run``: Perform a dry run build. This is off by default.
- ``--test``: Test the toolchain after it has been compiled. This is off by default.
- ``--distcc``: Use distcc to speed up the build by distributing the c++ part of
  the swift build. This is off by default.

More options may be added over time. Please pass ``--help`` to
``build-toolchain`` to see the full set of options.

#### Installing into Xcode

On macOS if one wants to install such a toolchain into Xcode:

1. Untar and copy the toolchain to one of `/Library/Developer/Toolchains/` or
   `~/Library/Developer/Toolchains/`. E.x.:

```
  $ sudo tar -xzf swift-LOCAL-YYYY-MM-DD-a-osx.tar.gz -C /
  $ tar -xzf swift-LOCAL-YYYY-MM-DD-a-osx.tar.gz -C ~/
```

The script also generates an archive containing debug symbols which
can be installed over the main archive allowing symbolication of any
compiler crashes.

```
  $ sudo tar -xzf swift-LOCAL-YYYY-MM-DD-a-osx-symbols.tar.gz -C /
  $ tar -xzf swift-LOCAL-YYYY-MM-DD-a-osx-symbols.tar.gz -C ~/
```

2. Specify the local toolchain for Xcode's use via `Xcode->Toolchains`.

### Build Failures

Make sure you are using the [correct release](#macos) of Xcode.

If you have changed Xcode versions but still encounter errors that appear to
be related to the Xcode version, try passing `--clean` to `build-script`.

When a new version of Xcode is released, you can update your build without
recompiling the entire project by passing the `--reconfigure` option.

Make sure all repositories are up to date with the `update-checkout` command
described above.

## Testing Swift

See [docs/Testing.md](docs/Testing.md), in particular the section on [lit.py](docs/Testing.md#using-litpy).

## Learning More

Be sure to look through the [docs](https://github.com/apple/swift/tree/master/docs)
directory for more information about the compiler. In particular, the documents
titled [Debugging the Swift Compiler](docs/DebuggingTheCompiler.rst) and
[Continuous Integration for Swift](docs/ContinuousIntegration.md) are very
helpful to understand before submitting your first PR.

### Building Documentation

To read the compiler documentation, start by installing the
[Sphinx](http://sphinx-doc.org) documentation generator tool by running the
command:

    easy_install -U Sphinx

Once complete, you can build the Swift documentation by changing directory into
[docs](https://github.com/apple/swift/tree/master/docs) and typing `make`. This
compiles the `.rst` files in the [docs](https://github.com/apple/swift/tree/master/docs)
directory into HTML in the `docs/_build/html` directory.

Many of the docs are out of date, but you can see some historical design
documents in the `docs` directory.

Another source of documentation is the standard library itself, located in
`stdlib`. Much of the language is actually implemented in the library
(including `Int`), and the standard library gives some examples of what can be
expressed today.

## Build Dependencies

### CMake
[CMake](https://cmake.org) is the core infrastructure used to configure builds of 
Swift and its companion projects; at least version 3.4.3 is required. 

On macOS, you can download the [CMake Binary Distribution](https://cmake.org/download),
bundled as an application, copy it to `/Applications`, and add the embedded
command line tools to your `PATH`:

    export PATH=/Applications/CMake.app/Contents/bin:$PATH

On Linux, if you have not already installed Swift's [development
dependencies](#linux), you can download and install the CMake
package separately using the following command:

    sudo apt-get install cmake


### Ninja
[Ninja](https://ninja-build.org) is the current recommended build system
for building Swift and is the default configuration generated by CMake. [Pre-built
packages](https://github.com/ninja-build/ninja/wiki/Pre-built-Ninja-packages)
are available for macOS and Linux distributions. You can also clone Ninja
next to the other projects and it will be bootstrapped automatically:

**Via HTTPS**

    git clone https://github.com/ninja-build/ninja.git && cd ninja
    git checkout release
    cat README

**Via SSH**

    git clone git@github.com:ninja-build/ninja.git && cd ninja
    git checkout release
    cat README
