utils/swift_snapshot_tool/README.md, before:


# Swift Snapshot Tool

Used to list and bisect nightly snapshots off of swift.org.

# Examples

## List snapshots

```
# xcrun swift run swift_snapshot_tool list
[INFO] Starting to download snapshot information from github.
[INFO] Finished downloading snapshot information from github.
0 swift-DEVELOPMENT-SNAPSHOT-2024-09-06-a
1 swift-DEVELOPMENT-SNAPSHOT-2024-09-05-a
2 swift-DEVELOPMENT-SNAPSHOT-2024-09-04-a
3 swift-DEVELOPMENT-SNAPSHOT-2024-08-29-a
...
```

The number to the left is just the number back through historical time that the
value is at. This allows for one to get a sense of the range of time in between
two bisect numbers since one can look at the range in between them and how time
varies.

## Run

```
xcrun swift run swift_snapshot_tool run --script $SCRIPT_NAME \
  --date YYYY-MM-DD [--invert] [--workspace $DIR_TO_DOWNLOAD_TOOLCHAINS]
```

run success is defined by `$SCRIPT_NAME` returning 0 as an exit code. All other
exit codes are considered a failure.

This command is meant to help one figure out where to start bisecting.

Options:

- workspace: This is the place where we will download toolchains to. Defaults to
  `/tmp/swift_snapshot_tool_workspace_v1`. We suggest that you use an external
  hard drive or a specified place so that one does not have to redownload
  toolchains in between system restarts.

- script: This is the script that should be run. We pass in the environment
  variables `SWIFT_EXEC`, `SWIFT_FRONTEND`, and `SWIFT_LIBRARY_PATH` to the
  script. If the script returns a zero exit code then the run is considered a
  succeess. If the script returns a non-zero exit code, then the run is
  considered a failure.

- date: A date in the form YYYY-MM-DD. If a snapshot at date does not exist, we
  choose the first snapshot before that date.

- invert: This causes test.sh's result to be inverted. This allows one to bisect
  backwards from a good state to a bad state. This is useful to determine when
  an error was fixed.

- branch: This controls the specific branch of snapshots that are downloaded. By
  default uses development. Also supports the options 5.0 and 6.0.

## Bisect

```
xcrun swift run swift_snapshot_tool bisect --script $SCRIPT_NAME --old-date YYYY_MM_DD \
   [--new-date YYYY_MM_DD] [--workspace $DIR_TO_DOWNLOAD_TOOLCHAINS]
```

bisect success is defined by `$SCRIPT_NAME` returning 0 as an exit code. All
other exit codes are considered a failure.

Options:

- workspace: This is the place where we will download toolchains to. Defaults to
  `/tmp/swift_snapshot_tool_workspace_v1`. We suggest that you use an external
  hard drive or a specified place so that one does not have to redownload
  toolchains in between system restarts.

- script: This is the script that should be run. We pass in the environment
  variables `SWIFT_EXEC`, `SWIFT_FRONTEND`, `SWIFT_LIBRARY_PATH` to the
  script. If the script returns a zero exit code then the run is considered a
  succeess. If the script returns a non-zero exit code, then the run is
  considered a failure.

- old-date: Date in the form of YYYY-MM-DD. This is assumed to succeed by
  returning a zero exit code. If a snapshot does not exist at this date, the
  tool will choose the first snapshot before the date.

- new-date: Date in the form of YYYY-MM-DD. This is assumed to fail by returning
  a non-zero exit code. If a snapshot does not exist at this date, the tool will
  choose the first snapshot before the date.

- invert: This causes test.sh's result to be inverted. This allows one to bisect
  backwards from a good state to a bad state. This is useful to determine when
  an error was fixed.

- branch: This controls the specific branch of snapshots that are downloaded. By
  default uses development. Also supports the options 5.0 and 6.0.

Commit message:

[swift-snapshot-tool] Fix the description in the README of branch specification to match how we do it today.
Today one uses --development, --release_5_0, --release_6_0, --release_6_2, etc
instead of previously how we specify it.

utils/swift_snapshot_tool/README.md, after:


# Swift Snapshot Tool

Used to list and bisect nightly snapshots off of swift.org.

# Examples

## List snapshots

```
# xcrun swift run swift_snapshot_tool list
[INFO] Starting to download snapshot information from github.
[INFO] Finished downloading snapshot information from github.
0 swift-DEVELOPMENT-SNAPSHOT-2024-09-06-a
1 swift-DEVELOPMENT-SNAPSHOT-2024-09-05-a
2 swift-DEVELOPMENT-SNAPSHOT-2024-09-04-a
3 swift-DEVELOPMENT-SNAPSHOT-2024-08-29-a
...
```

The number to the left is just the number back through historical time that the
value is at. This allows for one to get a sense of the range of time in between
two bisect numbers since one can look at the range in between them and how time
varies.

One can specify a branch of snapshots to list. By default uses
--development. Also supports the options --release_5_0, --release_6_0,
--release_6_2.

## Run

```
xcrun swift run swift_snapshot_tool run --script $SCRIPT_NAME \
  --date YYYY-MM-DD [--invert] [--workspace $DIR_TO_DOWNLOAD_TOOLCHAINS]
```

run success is defined by `$SCRIPT_NAME` returning 0 as an exit code. All other
exit codes are considered a failure.

This command is meant to help one figure out where to start bisecting.

Options:

- workspace: This is the place where we will download toolchains to. Defaults to
  `/tmp/swift_snapshot_tool_workspace_v1`. We suggest that you use an external
  hard drive or a specified place so that one does not have to redownload
  toolchains in between system restarts.

- script: This is the script that should be run. We pass in the environment
  variables `SWIFT_EXEC`, `SWIFT_FRONTEND`, and `SWIFT_LIBRARY_PATH` to the
  script. If the script returns a zero exit code then the run is considered a
  succeess. If the script returns a non-zero exit code, then the run is
  considered a failure.

- date: A date in the form YYYY-MM-DD. If a snapshot at date does not exist, we
  choose the first snapshot before that date.

- invert: This causes test.sh's result to be inverted. This allows one to bisect
  backwards from a good state to a bad state. This is useful to determine when
  an error was fixed.

- branch: This controls the specific branch of snapshots that are downloaded. By
  default uses --development. Also supports the options --release_5_0,
  --release_6_0, --release_6_2.

## Bisect

```
xcrun swift run swift_snapshot_tool bisect --script $SCRIPT_NAME --old-date YYYY_MM_DD \
   [--new-date YYYY_MM_DD] [--workspace $DIR_TO_DOWNLOAD_TOOLCHAINS]
```

bisect success is defined by `$SCRIPT_NAME` returning 0 as an exit code. All
other exit codes are considered a failure.

Options:

- workspace: This is the place where we will download toolchains to. Defaults to
  `/tmp/swift_snapshot_tool_workspace_v1`. We suggest that you use an external
  hard drive or a specified place so that one does not have to redownload
  toolchains in between system restarts.

- script: This is the script that should be run. We pass in the environment
  variables `SWIFT_EXEC`, `SWIFT_FRONTEND`, `SWIFT_LIBRARY_PATH` to the
  script. If the script returns a zero exit code then the run is considered a
  succeess. If the script returns a non-zero exit code, then the run is
  considered a failure.

- old-date: Date in the form of YYYY-MM-DD. This is assumed to succeed by
  returning a zero exit code. If a snapshot does not exist at this date, the
  tool will choose the first snapshot before the date.

- new-date: Date in the form of YYYY-MM-DD. This is assumed to fail by returning
  a non-zero exit code. If a snapshot does not exist at this date, the tool will
  choose the first snapshot before the date.

- invert: This causes test.sh's result to be inverted. This allows one to bisect
  backwards from a good state to a bad state. This is useful to determine when
  an error was fixed.

- branch: This controls the specific branch of snapshots that are downloaded. By
  default uses --development. Also supports the options --release_5_0,
  --release_6_0, --release_6_2.
