test/benchmark/Benchmark_O.test.md, before:

<!--
REQUIRES: OS=macosx
REQUIRES: asserts
REQUIRES: benchmark
REQUIRES: CMAKE_GENERATOR=Ninja
-->
# `Benchmark_O` Tests

The `Benchmark_O` binary is used directly from command line as well as a
subcomponent invoked from higher-level scripts (eg. [`Benchmark_Driver`][BD]).
These script therefore depend on the supported command line options and the
format of its console output. The following [`lit` tests][Testing] also serve
as a verification of this public API to prevent its accidental breakage.

[BD]: https://github.com/apple/swift/blob/master/benchmark/scripts/Benchmark_Driver
[Testing]: https://github.com/apple/swift/blob/master/docs/Testing.md

Note: Following tests use *Ackermann* as an example of a benchmark that is
excluded from the default "pre-commit" list because it is marked `unstable` and
the default skip-tags (`unstable,skip`) will exclude it. It's also
alphabetically the first benchmark in the test suite (used to verify running by
index). If these assumptions change, the test must be adapted.

## List Format
````
RUN: %Benchmark_O --list | %FileCheck %s \
RUN:                      --check-prefix LISTPRECOMMIT \
RUN:                      --check-prefix LISTTAGS
LISTPRECOMMIT: #,Test,[Tags]
LISTPRECOMMIT-NOT: Ackermann
LISTPRECOMMIT: {{[0-9]+}},AngryPhonebook
LISTTAGS-SAME: ,[
LISTTAGS-NOT: TestsUtils.BenchmarkCategory.
LISTTAGS-SAME: String, api, validation
LISTTAGS-SAME: ]
````

Verify Ackermann is listed when skip-tags are explicitly empty and that it is
marked unstable:

````
RUN: %Benchmark_O --list --skip-tags= | %FileCheck %s --check-prefix LISTALL
LISTALL: Ackermann
LISTALL-SAME: unstable
LISTALL: AngryPhonebook
````

## Benchmark Selection
The logic for filtering tests based on specified names, indices and tags
is shared between the default "run" and `--list` commands. It is tested on
the list command, which is much faster, because it runs no benchmarks.
It provides us with ability to do a "dry run".

Run benchmark by name (even if its tags match the skip-tags) or test number:

````
RUN: %Benchmark_O Ackermann --list | %FileCheck %s --check-prefix NAMEDSKIP
NAMEDSKIP: Ackermann

RUN: %Benchmark_O 1 --list | %FileCheck %s --check-prefix RUNBYNUMBER
RUNBYNUMBER: Ackermann
````

Composition of `tags` and `skip-tags`:

````
RUN: %Benchmark_O --list --tags=Dictionary,Array \
RUN:             | %FileCheck %s --check-prefix ANDTAGS
ANDTAGS: TwoSum
ANDTAGS-NOT: Array2D
ANDTAGS-NOT: DictionarySwap

RUN: %Benchmark_O --list --tags=algorithm --skip-tags=validation \
RUN:             | %FileCheck %s --check-prefix TAGSANDSKIPTAGS
TAGSANDSKIPTAGS: Ackermann
TAGSANDSKIPTAGS: DictOfArraysToArrayOfDicts
TAGSANDSKIPTAGS: Fibonacci
TAGSANDSKIPTAGS: RomanNumbers

RUN: %Benchmark_O --list --tags=algorithm \
RUN:              --skip-tags=validation,Dictionary,String \
RUN:             | %FileCheck %s --check-prefix ORSKIPTAGS
ORSKIPTAGS: Ackermann
ORSKIPTAGS-NOT: DictOfArraysToArrayOfDicts
ORSKIPTAGS: Fibonacci
ORSKIPTAGS-NOT: RomanNumbers
````

Alphabetic sorting of tests

````
RUN: %Benchmark_O --list \
RUN:             | %FileCheck %s --check-prefix ALPHASORT
ALPHASORT: COWArrayGuaranteedParameterOverhead
ALPHASORT: COWTree
ALPHASORT: ChainedFilterMap
ALPHASORT: Chars
ALPHASORT: FatCompactMap

````

## Running Benchmarks
Each real benchmark execution takes about a second per sample. If possible,
multiple checks are combined into one run to minimise the test time.

````
RUN: %Benchmark_O AngryPhonebook --num-iters=1 \
RUN:              | %FileCheck %s --check-prefix NUMITERS1 \
RUN:                              --check-prefix LOGHEADER \
RUN:                              --check-prefix LOGBENCH
LOGHEADER-LABEL: #,TEST,SAMPLES,MIN(μs),MAX(μs),MEAN(μs),SD(μs),MEDIAN(μs)
LOGBENCH: {{[0-9]+}},
NUMITERS1: AngryPhonebook,{{[0-9]+}}
NUMITERS1-NOT: 0,0,0,0,0
LOGBENCH-SAME: ,{{[0-9]+}},{{[0-9]+}},{{[0-9]+}},{{[0-9]+}},{{[0-9]+}}
````

### Reporting Quantiles
The default benchmark result reports statistics of a normal distribution —
mean and standard deviation. Unfortunately the samples from our benchmarks are
*not normally distributed*. To get a better picture of the underlying
probability distribution, we support reporting
[quantiles](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quantile).

````
RUN: %Benchmark_O 0 --quantile=4 | %FileCheck %s --check-prefix FIVENUMSUMMARY
FIVENUMSUMMARY: #,TEST,SAMPLES,MIN(μs),Q1(μs),Q2(μs),Q3(μs),MAX(μs)
RUN: %Benchmark_O 0 --quantile=20 | %FileCheck %s --check-prefix VENTILES
VENTILES: #,TEST,SAMPLES,MIN(μs),V1(μs),V2(μs),V3(μs),V4(μs),V5(μs),V6(μs),
VENTILES: V7(μs),V8(μs),V9(μs),VA(μs),VB(μs),VC(μs),VD(μs),VE(μs),VF(μs),VG(μs),
VENTILES: VH(μs),VI(μs),VJ(μs),MAX(μs)
````

### Verbose Mode
Reports detailed information during measurement, including configuration
details, environmental statistics (memory used and number of context switches)
and all individual samples. We'll reuse this test to check arguments that
modify the reported columns: `--memory`, `--quantile` and `--delta` to end with
*one less* number in the benchmark summary, compared to normal format. Given
that we are taking only 2 samples, the MEDIAN and MAX will be the same number.
With the `--delta` option this means that 𝚫MAX is zero, so the penultimate
number will be omitted from the output, giving us 2 consecutive delimiters (,,).

````
RUN: %Benchmark_O 1 Ackermann 1 AngryPhonebook \
RUN:              --verbose --num-samples=2 --memory --quantile=2 --delta \
RUN:              | %FileCheck %s --check-prefix RUNJUSTONCE \
RUN:                              --check-prefix CONFIG \
RUN:                              --check-prefix LOGVERBOSE \
RUN:                              --check-prefix MEASUREENV \
RUN:                              --check-prefix LOGFORMAT
CONFIG: NumSamples: 2
CONFIG: Tests Filter: ["1", "Ackermann", "1", "AngryPhonebook"]
CONFIG: Tests to run: Ackermann, AngryPhonebook
LOGFORMAT: #,TEST,SAMPLES,MIN(μs),𝚫MEDIAN,𝚫MAX,MAX_RSS(B)
LOGVERBOSE-LABEL: Running Ackermann
LOGVERBOSE: Collecting 2 samples.
LOGVERBOSE: Measuring with scale {{[0-9]+}}.
LOGVERBOSE: Sample 0,{{[0-9]+}}
LOGVERBOSE: Sample 1,{{[0-9]+}}
MEASUREENV: MAX_RSS {{[0-9]+}} - {{[0-9]+}} = {{[0-9]+}} ({{[0-9]+}} pages)
MEASUREENV: ICS {{[0-9]+}} - {{[0-9]+}} = {{[0-9]+}}
MEASUREENV: VCS {{[0-9]+}} - {{[0-9]+}} = {{[0-9]+}}
RUNJUSTONCE-LABEL: 1,Ackermann
RUNJUSTONCE-NOT: 1,Ackermann
LOGFORMAT: ,{{[0-9]+}},{{[0-9]+}},,{{[0-9]+}},{{[0-9]+}}
LOGVERBOSE-LABEL: Running AngryPhonebook
LOGVERBOSE: Collecting 2 samples.
````

Verify the specified delimiter is used when logging to console. The non-verbose
variant of this invocation is used from [`Benchmark_Driver`][BD] to get the list
of all tests. That's why it is *crucial* to tests this integration point.

````
RUN: %Benchmark_O --list --skip-tags= --delim=$'\t' --verbose \
RUN:              | %FileCheck %s --check-prefix LOGVERBOSEDELIM
LOGVERBOSEDELIM: Delimiter: "\t"
LOGVERBOSEDELIM: #	Test	[Tags]
````

## Error Handling

````
RUN: not %Benchmark_O --bogus 2>&1 \
RUN:              | %FileCheck %s --check-prefix ARGPARSE
ARGPARSE: error: unsupported argument '--bogus'

RUN: not %Benchmark_O --sample-time \
RUN:         2>&1 | %FileCheck %s --check-prefix NOVALUE
NOVALUE: error: missing value for '--sample-time'

RUN: not %Benchmark_O --sample-time= \
RUN:         2>&1 | %FileCheck %s --check-prefix EMPTYVAL
EMPTYVAL: error: missing value for '--sample-time'

RUN: not %Benchmark_O --sample-time=NaN \
RUN:         2>&1 | %FileCheck %s --check-prefix NANVALUE
NANVALUE: error: 'NaN' is not a valid 'Double' for '--sample-time'

RUN: not %Benchmark_O --num-iters \
RUN:         2>&1 | %FileCheck %s --check-prefix NUMITERS
NUMITERS: error: missing value for '--num-iters'

RUN: not %Benchmark_O --num-samples \
RUN:         2>&1 | %FileCheck %s --check-prefix NUMSAMPLES
NUMSAMPLES: error: missing value for '--num-samples'

RUN: not %Benchmark_O --sleep \
RUN:         2>&1 | %FileCheck %s --check-prefix SLEEP
SLEEP: error: missing value for '--sleep'

RUN: not %Benchmark_O --delim \
RUN:         2>&1 | %FileCheck %s --check-prefix DELIM
DELIM: error: missing value for '--delim'

RUN: not %Benchmark_O --tags=bogus \
RUN:         2>&1 | %FileCheck %s --check-prefix BADTAG
BADTAG: error: 'bogus' is not a valid 'BenchmarkCategory'

RUN: not %Benchmark_O --skip-tags=bogus \
RUN:         2>&1 | %FileCheck %s --check-prefix BADSKIPTAG
BADSKIPTAG: error: 'bogus' is not a valid 'BenchmarkCategory'

````

Measuring memory use of a test with our method is valid only for single test.

````
RUN: %Benchmark_O 1 2 --memory --list \
RUN:         2>&1 | %FileCheck %s --check-prefix WARNMEMORY
WARNMEMORY: warning:
````

## Usage

````
RUN: %Benchmark_O --help | %FileCheck %s --check-prefix OPTIONS
OPTIONS: usage: Benchmark_O [--argument=VALUE] [TEST [TEST ...]]
OPTIONS: optional arguments:
OPTIONS: --help
OPTIONS-SAME: show this help message and exit
OPTIONS: --verbose
OPTIONS: --delim
OPTIONS: --tags
OPTIONS: --list
````

Commit message:

[benchmark] Ackermann Redux
Reintroduce Ackermann benchmark with reasonably sized workload. Since this one was tagged `.unstable`, there’s no need to go through `legacyFactor`.

Adjusted `lit` test for Benchmark_O now that Ackermann isn’t marked `.unstable` anymore.

Removed incorrect `asserts` requirement from the benchmark lit tests.

test/benchmark/Benchmark_O.test.md, after:

<!--
REQUIRES: OS=macosx
REQUIRES: benchmark
REQUIRES: CMAKE_GENERATOR=Ninja
-->
# `Benchmark_O` Tests

The `Benchmark_O` binary is used directly from command line as well as a
subcomponent invoked from higher-level scripts (eg. [`Benchmark_Driver`][BD]).
These script therefore depend on the supported command line options and the
format of its console output. The following [`lit` tests][Testing] also serve
as a verification of this public API to prevent its accidental breakage.

[BD]: https://github.com/apple/swift/blob/master/benchmark/scripts/Benchmark_Driver
[Testing]: https://github.com/apple/swift/blob/master/docs/Testing.md

Note: Following tests use *HashQuadratic* as an example of a benchmark that is
excluded from the default "pre-commit" list because it is marked `unstable` and
the default skip-tags (`unstable,skip`) will exclude it.  The *Ackermann* and
*AngryPhonebook* are alphabetically the first two benchmarks in the test suite
(used to verify running by index). If these assumptions change, the test must be
adapted.

## List Format
````
RUN: %Benchmark_O --list | %FileCheck %s \
RUN:                      --check-prefix LISTPRECOMMIT \
RUN:                      --check-prefix LISTTAGS
LISTPRECOMMIT: #,Test,[Tags]
LISTPRECOMMIT-NOT: HashQuadratic
LISTPRECOMMIT: {{[0-9]+}},AngryPhonebook
LISTTAGS-SAME: ,[
LISTTAGS-NOT: TestsUtils.BenchmarkCategory.
LISTTAGS-SAME: String, api, validation
LISTTAGS-SAME: ]
````

Verify HashQuadratic is listed when skip-tags are explicitly empty and that it
is marked unstable:

````
RUN: %Benchmark_O --list --skip-tags= | %FileCheck %s --check-prefix LISTALL
LISTALL: AngryPhonebook
LISTALL: HashQuadratic
LISTALL-SAME: unstable
````

## Benchmark Selection
The logic for filtering tests based on specified names, indices and tags
is shared between the default "run" and `--list` commands. It is tested on
the list command, which is much faster, because it runs no benchmarks.
It provides us with ability to do a "dry run".

Run benchmark by name (even if its tags match the skip-tags) or test number:

````
RUN: %Benchmark_O HashQuadratic --list | %FileCheck %s --check-prefix NAMEDSKIP
NAMEDSKIP: HashQuadratic

RUN: %Benchmark_O 1 --list | %FileCheck %s --check-prefix RUNBYNUMBER
RUNBYNUMBER: Ackermann
````

Composition of `tags` and `skip-tags`:

````
RUN: %Benchmark_O --list --tags=Dictionary,Array \
RUN:             | %FileCheck %s --check-prefix ANDTAGS
ANDTAGS: TwoSum
ANDTAGS-NOT: Array2D
ANDTAGS-NOT: DictionarySwap

RUN: %Benchmark_O --list --tags=algorithm --skip-tags=validation \
RUN:             | %FileCheck %s --check-prefix TAGSANDSKIPTAGS
TAGSANDSKIPTAGS: Ackermann
TAGSANDSKIPTAGS: DictOfArraysToArrayOfDicts
TAGSANDSKIPTAGS: Fibonacci
TAGSANDSKIPTAGS: RomanNumbers

RUN: %Benchmark_O --list --tags=algorithm \
RUN:              --skip-tags=validation,Dictionary,String \
RUN:             | %FileCheck %s --check-prefix ORSKIPTAGS
ORSKIPTAGS: Ackermann
ORSKIPTAGS-NOT: DictOfArraysToArrayOfDicts
ORSKIPTAGS: Fibonacci
ORSKIPTAGS-NOT: RomanNumbers
````

Alphabetic sorting of tests

````
RUN: %Benchmark_O --list \
RUN:             | %FileCheck %s --check-prefix ALPHASORT
ALPHASORT: COWArrayGuaranteedParameterOverhead
ALPHASORT: COWTree
ALPHASORT: ChainedFilterMap
ALPHASORT: Chars
ALPHASORT: FatCompactMap

````

## Running Benchmarks
Each real benchmark execution takes about a second per sample. If possible,
multiple checks are combined into one run to minimise the test time.

````
RUN: %Benchmark_O AngryPhonebook --num-iters=1 \
RUN:              | %FileCheck %s --check-prefix NUMITERS1 \
RUN:                              --check-prefix LOGHEADER \
RUN:                              --check-prefix LOGBENCH
LOGHEADER-LABEL: #,TEST,SAMPLES,MIN(μs),MAX(μs),MEAN(μs),SD(μs),MEDIAN(μs)
LOGBENCH: {{[0-9]+}},
NUMITERS1: AngryPhonebook,{{[0-9]+}}
NUMITERS1-NOT: 0,0,0,0,0
LOGBENCH-SAME: ,{{[0-9]+}},{{[0-9]+}},{{[0-9]+}},{{[0-9]+}},{{[0-9]+}}
````

### Reporting Quantiles
The default benchmark result reports statistics of a normal distribution —
mean and standard deviation. Unfortunately the samples from our benchmarks are
*not normally distributed*. To get a better picture of the underlying
probability distribution, we support reporting
[quantiles](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quantile).

````
RUN: %Benchmark_O 0 --quantile=4 | %FileCheck %s --check-prefix FIVENUMSUMMARY
FIVENUMSUMMARY: #,TEST,SAMPLES,MIN(μs),Q1(μs),Q2(μs),Q3(μs),MAX(μs)
RUN: %Benchmark_O 0 --quantile=20 | %FileCheck %s --check-prefix VENTILES
VENTILES: #,TEST,SAMPLES,MIN(μs),V1(μs),V2(μs),V3(μs),V4(μs),V5(μs),V6(μs),
VENTILES: V7(μs),V8(μs),V9(μs),VA(μs),VB(μs),VC(μs),VD(μs),VE(μs),VF(μs),VG(μs),
VENTILES: VH(μs),VI(μs),VJ(μs),MAX(μs)
````

### Verbose Mode
Reports detailed information during measurement, including configuration
details, environmental statistics (memory used and number of context switches)
and all individual samples. We'll reuse this test to check arguments that
modify the reported columns: `--memory`, `--quantile` and `--delta` to end with
*one less* number in the benchmark summary, compared to normal format. Given
that we are taking only 2 samples, the MEDIAN and MAX will be the same number.
With the `--delta` option this means that 𝚫MAX is zero, so the penultimate
number will be omitted from the output, giving us 2 consecutive delimiters (,,).

````
RUN: %Benchmark_O 1 Ackermann 1 AngryPhonebook \
RUN:              --verbose --num-samples=2 --memory --quantile=2 --delta \
RUN:              | %FileCheck %s --check-prefix RUNJUSTONCE \
RUN:                              --check-prefix CONFIG \
RUN:                              --check-prefix LOGVERBOSE \
RUN:                              --check-prefix MEASUREENV \
RUN:                              --check-prefix LOGFORMAT
CONFIG: NumSamples: 2
CONFIG: Tests Filter: ["1", "Ackermann", "1", "AngryPhonebook"]
CONFIG: Tests to run: Ackermann, AngryPhonebook
LOGFORMAT: #,TEST,SAMPLES,MIN(μs),𝚫MEDIAN,𝚫MAX,MAX_RSS(B)
LOGVERBOSE-LABEL: Running Ackermann
LOGVERBOSE: Collecting 2 samples.
LOGVERBOSE: Measuring with scale {{[0-9]+}}.
LOGVERBOSE: Sample 0,{{[0-9]+}}
LOGVERBOSE: Sample 1,{{[0-9]+}}
MEASUREENV: MAX_RSS {{[0-9]+}} - {{[0-9]+}} = {{[0-9]+}} ({{[0-9]+}} pages)
MEASUREENV: ICS {{[0-9]+}} - {{[0-9]+}} = {{[0-9]+}}
MEASUREENV: VCS {{[0-9]+}} - {{[0-9]+}} = {{[0-9]+}}
RUNJUSTONCE-LABEL: 1,Ackermann
RUNJUSTONCE-NOT: 1,Ackermann
LOGFORMAT: ,{{[0-9]+}},{{[0-9]+}},,{{[0-9]+}},{{[0-9]+}}
LOGVERBOSE-LABEL: Running AngryPhonebook
LOGVERBOSE: Collecting 2 samples.
````

Verify the specified delimiter is used when logging to console. The non-verbose
variant of this invocation is used from [`Benchmark_Driver`][BD] to get the list
of all tests. That's why it is *crucial* to tests this integration point.

````
RUN: %Benchmark_O --list --skip-tags= --delim=$'\t' --verbose \
RUN:              | %FileCheck %s --check-prefix LOGVERBOSEDELIM
LOGVERBOSEDELIM: Delimiter: "\t"
LOGVERBOSEDELIM: #	Test	[Tags]
````

## Error Handling

````
RUN: not %Benchmark_O --bogus 2>&1 \
RUN:              | %FileCheck %s --check-prefix ARGPARSE
ARGPARSE: error: unsupported argument '--bogus'

RUN: not %Benchmark_O --sample-time \
RUN:         2>&1 | %FileCheck %s --check-prefix NOVALUE
NOVALUE: error: missing value for '--sample-time'

RUN: not %Benchmark_O --sample-time= \
RUN:         2>&1 | %FileCheck %s --check-prefix EMPTYVAL
EMPTYVAL: error: missing value for '--sample-time'

RUN: not %Benchmark_O --sample-time=NaN \
RUN:         2>&1 | %FileCheck %s --check-prefix NANVALUE
NANVALUE: error: 'NaN' is not a valid 'Double' for '--sample-time'

RUN: not %Benchmark_O --num-iters \
RUN:         2>&1 | %FileCheck %s --check-prefix NUMITERS
NUMITERS: error: missing value for '--num-iters'

RUN: not %Benchmark_O --num-samples \
RUN:         2>&1 | %FileCheck %s --check-prefix NUMSAMPLES
NUMSAMPLES: error: missing value for '--num-samples'

RUN: not %Benchmark_O --sleep \
RUN:         2>&1 | %FileCheck %s --check-prefix SLEEP
SLEEP: error: missing value for '--sleep'

RUN: not %Benchmark_O --delim \
RUN:         2>&1 | %FileCheck %s --check-prefix DELIM
DELIM: error: missing value for '--delim'

RUN: not %Benchmark_O --tags=bogus \
RUN:         2>&1 | %FileCheck %s --check-prefix BADTAG
BADTAG: error: 'bogus' is not a valid 'BenchmarkCategory'

RUN: not %Benchmark_O --skip-tags=bogus \
RUN:         2>&1 | %FileCheck %s --check-prefix BADSKIPTAG
BADSKIPTAG: error: 'bogus' is not a valid 'BenchmarkCategory'

````

Measuring memory use of a test with our method is valid only for single test.

````
RUN: %Benchmark_O 1 2 --memory --list \
RUN:         2>&1 | %FileCheck %s --check-prefix WARNMEMORY
WARNMEMORY: warning:
````

## Usage

````
RUN: %Benchmark_O --help | %FileCheck %s --check-prefix OPTIONS
OPTIONS: usage: Benchmark_O [--argument=VALUE] [TEST [TEST ...]]
OPTIONS: optional arguments:
OPTIONS: --help
OPTIONS-SAME: show this help message and exit
OPTIONS: --verbose
OPTIONS: --delim
OPTIONS: --tags
OPTIONS: --list
````
