=pod

=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

swift -- Safe, fast, and expressive general-purpose programming language

=head1 SYNOPSIS

To invoke the Swift REPL (Read-Eval-Print-Loop):

=over

B<swift> repl

=back

To execute a Swift program:

=over

B<swift> program.swift <arguments>

=back

To work with the Swift Package Manager:

=over

B<swift> build|package|run|test [options] <inputs>

=back

To invoke the Swift compiler:

=over

B<swiftc> [options] <inputs>

=back

A list of supported options is available through the "-help" option:

=over

B<swift> -help

B<swift> build -help

B<swiftc> -help

=back

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Swift is a general-purpose programming language built using a modern approach to
safety, performance, and software design patterns.

The goal of the Swift project is to create the best available language for uses
ranging from systems programming, to mobile and desktop apps, scaling up to
cloud services. Most importantly, Swift is designed to make writing and
maintaining I<correct> programs easier for the developer. To achieve this goal,
we believe that the most obvious way to write Swift code must also be:

B<Safe.> The most obvious way to write code should also behave in a safe manner.
Undefined behavior is the enemy of safety, and developer mistakes should be
caught before software is in production. Opting for safety sometimes means Swift
will feel strict, but we believe that clarity saves time in the long run.

B<Fast.> Swift is intended as a replacement for C-based languages (C, C++, and
Objective-C). As such, Swift must be comparable to those languages in
performance for most tasks. Performance must also be predictable and consistent,
not just fast in short bursts that require clean-up later. There are lots of
languages with novel features - being fast is rare.

B<Expressive.> Swift benefits from decades of advancement in computer science to
offer syntax that is a joy to use, with modern features developers expect. But
Swift is never done. We will monitor language advancements and embrace what
works, continually evolving to make Swift even better.

=head1 BUGS

Reporting bugs is a great way for anyone to help improve Swift. The issue
tracker for Swift, an open-source project, is located at
L<https://github.com/swiftlang/swift/issues>.

If a bug can be reproduced only within an Xcode project or a playground, or if
the bug is associated with an Apple NDA, please file a report to Apple's
Feedback Assistant at L<https://feedbackassistant.apple.com> instead.

=head1 SEE ALSO

=head2 HOME PAGE

L<https://swift.org>

=head2 APPLE DEVELOPER RESOURCES

L<https://developer.apple.com/swift/resources>

=head2 CODE REPOSITORIES

Swift Programming Language at L<https://github.com/swiftlang/swift>

Swift Package Manager at L<https://github.com/swiftlang/swift-package-manager>
