docs/HighLevelSILOptimizations.rst, before:

:orphan:

.. _HighLevelSILOptimizations:

High-Level Optimizations in SIL
===============================

.. contents::

Abstract
--------

This document describes the high-level abstraction of built-in Swift
data structures in SIL that is used by the optimizer. You need to read
this document if you wish to understand the early stages of the Swift
optimizer or if you are working on one of the containers in the
standard library.


Why do we need high-level optimizations?
-----------------------------------------

Swift containers are implemented in the Swift standard library in Swift code.
Traditional compiler optimizations can remove some of the redundancy that is
found in high-level code, but not all of it. Without knowledge of the Swift
language the optimizer can't perform high-level optimizations on the built-in
containers. For example::

  Dict["a"] = 1
  Dict["a"] = 2

Any Swift developer could identify the redundancy in the code sample above.
Storing two values into the same key in the dictionary is inefficient.
However, optimizing compilers are unaware of the special semantics that the
Swift dictionary has and can't perform this optimization. Traditional
compilers would start optimizing this code by inlining the subscript
function call and try to analyze the sequence of load/store instructions.
This approach is not very effective because the compiler has to be very
conservative when optimizing general code with pointers.

On the other hand, compilers for high-level languages usually have special
bytecode instructions that allow them to perform high-level optimizations.
However, unlike high-level languages such as JavaScript or Python, Swift
containers are implemented in Swift itself. Moreover, it is beneficial to
be able to inline code from the container into the user program and optimize
them together, especially for code that uses Generics.

In order to perform both high-level optimizations, that are common in
high-level languages, and low-level optimizations we annotate parts of the
standard library and describe the semantics of a domain-specific high-level
operations on data types in the Swift standard library.

Annotation of code in the standard library
------------------------------------------

We use the ``@_semantics`` attribute to annotate code in the standard library.
These annotations can be used by the high-level SIL optimizer to perform
domain-specific optimizations.

This is an example of the ``@_semantics`` attribute::

  @public @_semantics("array.count")
  func getCount() -> Int {
    return _buffer.count
   }

In this example we annotate a member of the Swift array struct with the tag
``array.count``. This tag informs the optimizer that this method reads the
size of the array.


The ``@_semantics`` attribute allows us to define "builtin" SIL-level
operations implemented in Swift code. In SIL code they are encoded as
apply instructions, but the optimizer can operate on them as atomic
instructions. The semantic annotations don't necessarily need to be on
public APIs. For example, the Array subscript operator may invoke two
operations in the semantic model. One for checking the bounds and
another one for accessing the elements. With this abstraction the
optimizer can remove the ``checkSubscript`` instruction and keep the
getElement instruction::

  @public subscript(index: Int) -> Element {
     get {
      checkSubscript(index)
      return getElement(index)
     }

  @_semantics("array.check_subscript") func checkSubscript(_ index: Int) {
    ...
  }

  @_semantics("array.get_element") func getElement(_ index: Int) -> Element {
    return _buffer[index]
  }


Swift optimizations
-------------------
The Swift optimizer can access the information that is provided by the
``@_semantics`` attribute to perform high-level optimizations. In the early
stages of the optimization pipeline the optimizer does not inline functions
with special semantics in order to allow the early high-level optimization
passes to operate on them. In the later stages of the optimization pipeline
the optimizer inlines functions with special semantics to allow low-level
optimizations.


Annotated data structures in the standard library
-------------------------------------------------

This section describes the semantic tags that are assigned to data-structures
in the standard library and the axioms that the optimizer uses.


Cloning code from the standard library
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The Swift compiler can copy code from the standard library into the
application. This allows the optimizer to inline calls from stdlib and improve
the performance of code that uses common operators such as '++' or basic
containers such as Array. However, importing code from the standard library can
increase the binary size. Marking functions with @_semantics("stdlib_binary_only")
will prevent the copying of the marked function from the standard library into the
user program.

Notice that this annotation is similar to the resilient annotation that will
disallow the cloning of code into the user application.

Array
~~~~~

The following semantic tags describe Array operations. The operations
are first described in terms of the Array "state". Relations between the
operations are formally defined below. 'Array' refers to the standard library
Array<Element>, ContiguousArray<Element>, and ArraySlice<Element>
data-structures.

We consider the array state to consist of a set of disjoint elements
and a storage descriptor that encapsulates nonelement data such as the
element count and capacity. Operations that semantically write state
are always *control dependent*. A control dependent operation is one
that may only be executed on the control flow paths in which the
operation originally appeared, ignoring potential program
exits. Generally, operations that only read state are not control
dependent. One exception is ``check_subscript`` which is readonly but
control dependent because it may trap. Some operations are *guarded*
by others. A guarded operation can never be executed before its
guard.

array.init

  Initialize an array with new storage. This currently applies to any
  initializer that does not get its storage from an argument. This
  semantically writes to every array element and the array's storage
  descriptor. ``init`` also implies the guarding semantics of
  ``make_mutable``. It is not itself guarded by ``make_mutable`` and
  may act as a guard to other potentially mutating operations, such as
  ``get_element_address``.

array.uninitialized(count: Builtin.Word) -> (Array<Element>, Builtin.RawPointer)

  Creates an array with the specified number of elements. It initializes
  the storage descriptor but not the array elements. The returned tuple
  contains the new array and a raw pointer to the element storage.
  The caller is responsible for writing the elements to the element storage.

array.props.isCocoa/needsElementTypeCheck -> Bool

  Reads storage descriptors properties (isCocoa, needsElementTypeCheck).
  This is not control dependent or guarded. The optimizer has
  semantic knowledge of the state transfer those properties cannot make:
  An array that is not ``isCocoa`` cannot transfer to ``isCocoa``.
  An array that is not ``needsElementTypeCheck`` cannot transfer to
  ``needsElementTypeCheck``.

array.get_element(index: Int) -> Element

   Read an element from the array at the specified index. No other
   elements are read. The storage descriptor is not read. No state is
   written. This operation is not control dependent, but may be
   guarded by ``check_subscript``. Any ``check_subscript`` may act as a
   guard, regardless of the index being checked [#f1]_.

array.get_element_address(index: Int) -> UnsafeMutablePointer<Element>

   Get the address of an element of the array. No state is written. The storage
   descriptor is not read. The resulting pointer may be used to access elements
   in the array. This operation is not control dependent, but may be guarded by
   ``check_subscript``. Any ``check_subscript``, ``make_mutable`` or
   ``mutate_unknown`` may act as a guard.

array.check_subscript(index: Int)

  Read the array count from the storage descriptor. Execute a ``trap``
  if ``index < array.startIndex || index >= array.endIndex``. No elements are
  read. No state is written. Despite being read only, this operation is control
  dependent.

array.get_count() -> Int

  Read the array count (``array.endIndex - array.startIndex``) from the storage
  descriptor. No elements are read. No state is written. This is neither guarded
  nor control dependent.

array.get_capacity() -> Int

  Read the array capacity from the storage descriptor. The semantics
  are identical to ``get_count`` except for the meaning of the return value.

array.make_mutable()

  This operation guards mutating operations that don't already imply
  ``make_mutable`` semantics. (Currently, the only guarded operation
  is ``get_element_address``.) ``make_mutable`` may create a copy of the array
  storage; however, semantically it neither reads nor writes the array
  state. It does not write state simply because the copy's state is
  identical to the original. It does not read state because no other
  Array operations can undo mutability--only code that retains a
  reference to the Array can do that. ``make_mutable`` does
  effectively need to be guarded by any SIL operation that may retain
  the array. Because ``make_mutable`` semantically does not read the
  array state, is idempotent, and has no control dependence, it can be
  executed safely on any array at any point. i.e. the optimizer can
  freely insert calls to make_mutable.

array.mutate_unknown

  This operation may mutate the array in any way, so it semantically
  writes to the entire array state and is naturally control
  dependent. ``mutate_unknown`` also implies the guarding semantics of
  ``make_mutable``. It is not itself guarded by ``make_mutable`` and
  may act as a guard to other mutating operations, such as
  ``get_element_address``. Combining semantics allows the flexibility in how
  the array copy is implemented in conjunction with implementing
  mutating functionality. This may be more efficient than cleanly
  isolating the copy and mutation code.

To complete the semantics understood by the optimizer, we define these relations:

interferes-with

  Given idempotent ``OpA``, the sequence "``OpA, OpB, OpA``" is
  semantically equivalent to the sequence "``OpA, OpB``" *iff* ``OpB``
  does not interfere with ``OpA``.

  All array operations marked with semantics are idempotent as long as
  they call the same function with the same argument values, with the
  exception of ``mutate_unknown``.

guards

  If ``OpA`` guards ``OpB``, then the sequence of operations
  ``OpA, OpB`` must be preserved on any control flow path on which the
  sequence originally appears.

An operation can only interfere-with or guard another if they may operate on the same Array.
``get_element_address`` is abbreviated with ``get_elt_addr`` in the table below.

================ =============== ==========================================
semantic op      relation        semantic ops
================ =============== ==========================================
make_mutable     guards          get_element_address
check_subscript  guards          get_element, get_element_address
make_mutable     interferes-with props.isCocoa/needsElementTypeCheck
get_elt_addr     interferes-with get_element, get_element_address,
                                 props.isCocoa/needsElementTypeCheck
mutate_unknown   interferes-with get_element, check_subscript, get_count,
                                 get_capacity, get_element_address,
                                 props.isCocoa/needsElementTypeCheck
================ =============== ==========================================

.. [#f1] Any check_subscript(N) may act as a guard for
         ``get_element(i)/get_element_address(i)`` as long as it can be
         shown that ``N >= i``.

In addition to preserving these semantics, the optimizer must
conservatively handle any unknown access to the array object. For
example, if a SIL operation takes the address to any member of the
Array, any subsequent operations that may have visibility of that
address are considered to interfere with any array operations with
explicit semantics.

String
~~~~~~

string.concat(lhs: String, rhs: String) -> String

  Performs concatenation of two strings. Operands are not mutated.
  This operation can be optimized away in case of both operands
  being string literals. In this case, it can be replaced by
  a string literal representing a concatenation of both operands.

string.makeUTF8(start: RawPointer, utf8CodeUnitCount: Word, isASCII: Int1) -> String

  Converts a built-in UTF8-encoded string literal into a string.

string.makeUTF16(start: RawPointer, utf16CodeUnitCount: Word) -> String

  Converts a built-in UTF16-encoded string literal into a string.

Dictionary
~~~~~~~~~~
TBD.

@effects attribute
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The @effects attribute describes how a function affects "the state of the world".
More practically how the optimizer can modify the program based on information
that is provided by the attribute.

Usage:

  @effects(readonly) func foo() { .. }


The @effects attribute supports the following tags:

readnone

  function has no side effects and no dependencies on the state of
  the program. It always returns an identical result given
  identical inputs. Calls to readnone functions can be eliminated,
  reordered, and folded arbitrarily.

readonly

  function has no side effects, but is dependent on the global
  state of the program. Calls to readonly functions can be
  eliminated, but cannot be reordered or folded in a way that would
  move calls to the readnone function across side effects.

readwrite

  function has side effects and the optimizer can't assume anything.

Optimize semantics attribute
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The optimize attribute adds function-specific directives to the optimizer.

The optimize attribute supports the following tags:

sil.never

   The sil optimizer should not optimize this function.

  Example:
  @_semantics("optimize.sil.never")
  func miscompile() { ... }

Availability checks
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The availability attribute is used for functions which implement the ``if #available``
guards.

The availability attribute supports the following tags:

availability.osversion(major: Builtin.Word, minor: Builtin.Word, patch: Builtin.Word) -> Builtin.Int1

  Returns true if the OS version matches the parameters.

Commit message:

[sil-generic-specializer] Do not create specializations for functions marked with @_semantics("optimize.sil.specialize.generic.never")
Those functions are not critical for performance, but their specializations result in a stdlib code bloat.

docs/HighLevelSILOptimizations.rst, after:

:orphan:

.. _HighLevelSILOptimizations:

High-Level Optimizations in SIL
===============================

.. contents::

Abstract
--------

This document describes the high-level abstraction of built-in Swift
data structures in SIL that is used by the optimizer. You need to read
this document if you wish to understand the early stages of the Swift
optimizer or if you are working on one of the containers in the
standard library.


Why do we need high-level optimizations?
-----------------------------------------

Swift containers are implemented in the Swift standard library in Swift code.
Traditional compiler optimizations can remove some of the redundancy that is
found in high-level code, but not all of it. Without knowledge of the Swift
language the optimizer can't perform high-level optimizations on the built-in
containers. For example::

  Dict["a"] = 1
  Dict["a"] = 2

Any Swift developer could identify the redundancy in the code sample above.
Storing two values into the same key in the dictionary is inefficient.
However, optimizing compilers are unaware of the special semantics that the
Swift dictionary has and can't perform this optimization. Traditional
compilers would start optimizing this code by inlining the subscript
function call and try to analyze the sequence of load/store instructions.
This approach is not very effective because the compiler has to be very
conservative when optimizing general code with pointers.

On the other hand, compilers for high-level languages usually have special
bytecode instructions that allow them to perform high-level optimizations.
However, unlike high-level languages such as JavaScript or Python, Swift
containers are implemented in Swift itself. Moreover, it is beneficial to
be able to inline code from the container into the user program and optimize
them together, especially for code that uses Generics.

In order to perform both high-level optimizations, that are common in
high-level languages, and low-level optimizations we annotate parts of the
standard library and describe the semantics of a domain-specific high-level
operations on data types in the Swift standard library.

Annotation of code in the standard library
------------------------------------------

We use the ``@_semantics`` attribute to annotate code in the standard library.
These annotations can be used by the high-level SIL optimizer to perform
domain-specific optimizations.

This is an example of the ``@_semantics`` attribute::

  @public @_semantics("array.count")
  func getCount() -> Int {
    return _buffer.count
   }

In this example we annotate a member of the Swift array struct with the tag
``array.count``. This tag informs the optimizer that this method reads the
size of the array.


The ``@_semantics`` attribute allows us to define "builtin" SIL-level
operations implemented in Swift code. In SIL code they are encoded as
apply instructions, but the optimizer can operate on them as atomic
instructions. The semantic annotations don't necessarily need to be on
public APIs. For example, the Array subscript operator may invoke two
operations in the semantic model. One for checking the bounds and
another one for accessing the elements. With this abstraction the
optimizer can remove the ``checkSubscript`` instruction and keep the
getElement instruction::

  @public subscript(index: Int) -> Element {
     get {
      checkSubscript(index)
      return getElement(index)
     }

  @_semantics("array.check_subscript") func checkSubscript(_ index: Int) {
    ...
  }

  @_semantics("array.get_element") func getElement(_ index: Int) -> Element {
    return _buffer[index]
  }


Swift optimizations
-------------------
The Swift optimizer can access the information that is provided by the
``@_semantics`` attribute to perform high-level optimizations. In the early
stages of the optimization pipeline the optimizer does not inline functions
with special semantics in order to allow the early high-level optimization
passes to operate on them. In the later stages of the optimization pipeline
the optimizer inlines functions with special semantics to allow low-level
optimizations.


Annotated data structures in the standard library
-------------------------------------------------

This section describes the semantic tags that are assigned to data-structures
in the standard library and the axioms that the optimizer uses.


Cloning code from the standard library
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The Swift compiler can copy code from the standard library into the
application. This allows the optimizer to inline calls from stdlib and improve
the performance of code that uses common operators such as '++' or basic
containers such as Array. However, importing code from the standard library can
increase the binary size. Marking functions with @_semantics("stdlib_binary_only")
will prevent the copying of the marked function from the standard library into the
user program.

Notice that this annotation is similar to the resilient annotation that will
disallow the cloning of code into the user application.

Array
~~~~~

The following semantic tags describe Array operations. The operations
are first described in terms of the Array "state". Relations between the
operations are formally defined below. 'Array' refers to the standard library
Array<Element>, ContiguousArray<Element>, and ArraySlice<Element>
data-structures.

We consider the array state to consist of a set of disjoint elements
and a storage descriptor that encapsulates nonelement data such as the
element count and capacity. Operations that semantically write state
are always *control dependent*. A control dependent operation is one
that may only be executed on the control flow paths in which the
operation originally appeared, ignoring potential program
exits. Generally, operations that only read state are not control
dependent. One exception is ``check_subscript`` which is readonly but
control dependent because it may trap. Some operations are *guarded*
by others. A guarded operation can never be executed before its
guard.

array.init

  Initialize an array with new storage. This currently applies to any
  initializer that does not get its storage from an argument. This
  semantically writes to every array element and the array's storage
  descriptor. ``init`` also implies the guarding semantics of
  ``make_mutable``. It is not itself guarded by ``make_mutable`` and
  may act as a guard to other potentially mutating operations, such as
  ``get_element_address``.

array.uninitialized(count: Builtin.Word) -> (Array<Element>, Builtin.RawPointer)

  Creates an array with the specified number of elements. It initializes
  the storage descriptor but not the array elements. The returned tuple
  contains the new array and a raw pointer to the element storage.
  The caller is responsible for writing the elements to the element storage.

array.props.isCocoa/needsElementTypeCheck -> Bool

  Reads storage descriptors properties (isCocoa, needsElementTypeCheck).
  This is not control dependent or guarded. The optimizer has
  semantic knowledge of the state transfer those properties cannot make:
  An array that is not ``isCocoa`` cannot transfer to ``isCocoa``.
  An array that is not ``needsElementTypeCheck`` cannot transfer to
  ``needsElementTypeCheck``.

array.get_element(index: Int) -> Element

   Read an element from the array at the specified index. No other
   elements are read. The storage descriptor is not read. No state is
   written. This operation is not control dependent, but may be
   guarded by ``check_subscript``. Any ``check_subscript`` may act as a
   guard, regardless of the index being checked [#f1]_.

array.get_element_address(index: Int) -> UnsafeMutablePointer<Element>

   Get the address of an element of the array. No state is written. The storage
   descriptor is not read. The resulting pointer may be used to access elements
   in the array. This operation is not control dependent, but may be guarded by
   ``check_subscript``. Any ``check_subscript``, ``make_mutable`` or
   ``mutate_unknown`` may act as a guard.

array.check_subscript(index: Int)

  Read the array count from the storage descriptor. Execute a ``trap``
  if ``index < array.startIndex || index >= array.endIndex``. No elements are
  read. No state is written. Despite being read only, this operation is control
  dependent.

array.get_count() -> Int

  Read the array count (``array.endIndex - array.startIndex``) from the storage
  descriptor. No elements are read. No state is written. This is neither guarded
  nor control dependent.

array.get_capacity() -> Int

  Read the array capacity from the storage descriptor. The semantics
  are identical to ``get_count`` except for the meaning of the return value.

array.make_mutable()

  This operation guards mutating operations that don't already imply
  ``make_mutable`` semantics. (Currently, the only guarded operation
  is ``get_element_address``.) ``make_mutable`` may create a copy of the array
  storage; however, semantically it neither reads nor writes the array
  state. It does not write state simply because the copy's state is
  identical to the original. It does not read state because no other
  Array operations can undo mutability--only code that retains a
  reference to the Array can do that. ``make_mutable`` does
  effectively need to be guarded by any SIL operation that may retain
  the array. Because ``make_mutable`` semantically does not read the
  array state, is idempotent, and has no control dependence, it can be
  executed safely on any array at any point. i.e. the optimizer can
  freely insert calls to make_mutable.

array.mutate_unknown

  This operation may mutate the array in any way, so it semantically
  writes to the entire array state and is naturally control
  dependent. ``mutate_unknown`` also implies the guarding semantics of
  ``make_mutable``. It is not itself guarded by ``make_mutable`` and
  may act as a guard to other mutating operations, such as
  ``get_element_address``. Combining semantics allows the flexibility in how
  the array copy is implemented in conjunction with implementing
  mutating functionality. This may be more efficient than cleanly
  isolating the copy and mutation code.

To complete the semantics understood by the optimizer, we define these relations:

interferes-with

  Given idempotent ``OpA``, the sequence "``OpA, OpB, OpA``" is
  semantically equivalent to the sequence "``OpA, OpB``" *iff* ``OpB``
  does not interfere with ``OpA``.

  All array operations marked with semantics are idempotent as long as
  they call the same function with the same argument values, with the
  exception of ``mutate_unknown``.

guards

  If ``OpA`` guards ``OpB``, then the sequence of operations
  ``OpA, OpB`` must be preserved on any control flow path on which the
  sequence originally appears.

An operation can only interfere-with or guard another if they may operate on the same Array.
``get_element_address`` is abbreviated with ``get_elt_addr`` in the table below.

================ =============== ==========================================
semantic op      relation        semantic ops
================ =============== ==========================================
make_mutable     guards          get_element_address
check_subscript  guards          get_element, get_element_address
make_mutable     interferes-with props.isCocoa/needsElementTypeCheck
get_elt_addr     interferes-with get_element, get_element_address,
                                 props.isCocoa/needsElementTypeCheck
mutate_unknown   interferes-with get_element, check_subscript, get_count,
                                 get_capacity, get_element_address,
                                 props.isCocoa/needsElementTypeCheck
================ =============== ==========================================

.. [#f1] Any check_subscript(N) may act as a guard for
         ``get_element(i)/get_element_address(i)`` as long as it can be
         shown that ``N >= i``.

In addition to preserving these semantics, the optimizer must
conservatively handle any unknown access to the array object. For
example, if a SIL operation takes the address to any member of the
Array, any subsequent operations that may have visibility of that
address are considered to interfere with any array operations with
explicit semantics.

String
~~~~~~

string.concat(lhs: String, rhs: String) -> String

  Performs concatenation of two strings. Operands are not mutated.
  This operation can be optimized away in case of both operands
  being string literals. In this case, it can be replaced by
  a string literal representing a concatenation of both operands.

string.makeUTF8(start: RawPointer, utf8CodeUnitCount: Word, isASCII: Int1) -> String

  Converts a built-in UTF8-encoded string literal into a string.

string.makeUTF16(start: RawPointer, utf16CodeUnitCount: Word) -> String

  Converts a built-in UTF16-encoded string literal into a string.

Dictionary
~~~~~~~~~~
TBD.

@effects attribute
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The @effects attribute describes how a function affects "the state of the world".
More practically how the optimizer can modify the program based on information
that is provided by the attribute.

Usage:

  @effects(readonly) func foo() { .. }


The @effects attribute supports the following tags:

readnone

  function has no side effects and no dependencies on the state of
  the program. It always returns an identical result given
  identical inputs. Calls to readnone functions can be eliminated,
  reordered, and folded arbitrarily.

readonly

  function has no side effects, but is dependent on the global
  state of the program. Calls to readonly functions can be
  eliminated, but cannot be reordered or folded in a way that would
  move calls to the readnone function across side effects.

readwrite

  function has side effects and the optimizer can't assume anything.

Optimize semantics attribute
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The optimize attribute adds function-specific directives to the optimizer.

The optimize attribute supports the following tags:

sil.never

   The sil optimizer should not optimize this function.

  Example:
  @_semantics("optimize.sil.never")
  func miscompile() { ... }

sil.specialize.generic.never

   The sil optimizer should never create generic specializations of this function. 


Availability checks
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The availability attribute is used for functions which implement the ``if #available``
guards.

The availability attribute supports the following tags:

availability.osversion(major: Builtin.Word, minor: Builtin.Word, patch: Builtin.Word) -> Builtin.Int1

  Returns true if the OS version matches the parameters.
