docs/valref.rst, before:

.. _valref:

=======================
 Values and References
=======================

:Author: Dave Abrahams
:Author: Joe Groff
:Date: 2013-03-15

**Abstract:** We propose a system that offers first-class support for
both value and reference semantics.  By allowing—but not
requiring—(instance) variables, function parameters, and generic
constraints to be declared as ``val`` or ``ref``, we offer users the
ability to nail down semantics to the desired degree without
compromising ease of use.

.. Note::

   We are aware of some issues with naming of these new keywords; to
   avoid chaos we discuss alternative spelling schemes in a section at
   the end of this document.

Introduction
============

* Dave

General Description
===================

The general rule we propose is that most places where you can write
``var`` in today's swift, and also on function parameters, you can
write ``val`` or ``ref`` to request specific semantics.  Writing
``var`` requests the default for a given type.  Non-``class`` types
(``struct``\ s, tuples, arrays, ``oneof``\ s) default to ``val``
semantics, while ``class``\ es default to ``ref`` semantics.  Because
the current specification already describes the default behaviors, we
will restrict ourselves to discussing the new combinations, such as
``struct`` variables declared with ``ref`` and ``class`` variables declared
with ``val``.

Terminology
===========

When we use the term "copy" for non-``class`` types, we are talking
about what traditionally happens on assignment and pass-by-value.
When applied to ``class`` types, "copy" means to call the ``clone()``
method generated due to the user's explicit declaration of conformance
to the ``Clonable`` protocol.

When we refer to variables being "declared ``val``" or "declared
``ref``", we mean to include the case of equivalent declarations using
``var`` that request the default semantics for the type.

Unless otherwise specified, we discuss implementation details such as
"allocated on the heap" as a way of describing operational semantics,
with the understanding that semantics-preserving optimizations are
always allowed.

When we refer to the "value" of a class, we mean the combination of
values of its ``val`` instance variables and the identities of its
``ref`` instance variables.

Variables
=========

Variables can be explicitly declared ``val`` or ``ref``::

    var x: Int  // x is stored by value
    val y: Int  // just like "var y: Int"
    ref z: Int  // z is allocated on the heap.

    var q: SomeClass          // a reference to SomeClass
    ref r: SomeClass          // just like "var r: SomeClass"
    val s: SomeClonableClass // a unique value of SomeClonableClass type

Assignments and initializations involving at least one ``val`` result
in a copy.  Creating a ``ref`` from a ``val`` copies into heap memory::

    ref z2 = x         // z2 is a copy of x's value on the heap
    y = z              // z2's value is copied into y

    ref z2 = z         // z and z2 refer to the same Int value
    ref z3 = z.clone() // z3 refers to a copy of z's value

    val t = r          // Illegal unless SomeClass is Clonable
    ref u = s          // s's value is copied into u
    val v = s          // s's value is copied into v

Standalone Types
================

``val``\ - or ``ref``\ -ness is part of the type.  When the type
appears without a variable name, it can be written this way::

   ref Int                 // an Int on the heap
   val SomeCloneableClass  // a value of SomeCloneableClass type

Therefore, although it is not recommended style, we can also write::

    var y: val Int               // just like "var y: Int"
    var z: ref Int               // z is allocated on the heap.
    var s: val SomeClonableClass // a unique value of type SomeClonableClass

Instance Variables
==================

Instance variables can be explicitly declared ``val`` or ``ref``::

  struct Foo {
      var x: Int  // x is stored by-value
      val y: Int  // just like "var y: Int"
      ref z: Int  // allocate z on the heap

      var q: SomeClass          // q is a reference to SomeClass
      ref r: SomeClass          // just like "var r: SomeClass"
      val s: SomeClonableClass // clone() s when Foo is copied
  }

  class Bar : Clonable {
      var x: Int  // x is stored by-value
      val y: Int  // just like "var y: Int"
      ref z: Int  // allocate z on the heap

      var q: SomeClass          // q is stored by-reference
      ref r: SomeClass          // just like "var r: SomeClass"
      val s: SomeClonableClass // clone() s when Bar is clone()d
  }

When a value is copied, all of its instance variables declared ``val``
(implicitly or explicitly) are copied.  Instance variables declared
``ref`` merely have their reference counts incremented (i.e. the
refrence is copied).  Therefore, when the defaults are in play, the
semantic rules already defined for Swift are preserved.

The new rules are as follows:

* A non-``class`` instance variable declared ``ref`` is allocated on
  the heap and can outlive its enclosing ``struct``.

* A ``class`` instance variable declared ``val`` will be copied when
  its enclosing ``struct`` or ``class`` is copied.  We discuss below__
  what to do when the ``class`` is not ``Clonable``.

Arrays
======

Array elements can be explicitly declared ``val`` or ``ref``::

  var x : Int[42]         // an array of 42 integers
  var y : Int[val 42]     // an array of 42 integers
  var z : Int[ref 42]     // an array of 42 integers-on-the-heap
  var z : Int[ref 2][42]  // an array of 2 references to arrays
  ref a : Int[42]         // a reference to an array of 42 integers

When a reference to an array appears without a variable name, it can
be written using the `usual syntax`__::

  var f : ()->ref Int[42] // a closure returning a reference to an array
  var b : ref Int[42]     // equivalent to to "ref b : Int[42]"

__ `standalone types`_

Presumably there is also some fully-desugared syntax using angle
brackets, that most users will never touch, e.g.::

  var x : Array<Int,42>               // an array of 42 integers
  var y : Array<Int,val 42>           // an array of 42 integers
  var z : Array<Int,ref 42>           // an array of 42 integers-on-the-heap
  var z : Array<ref Array<Int,42>, 2> // an array of 2 references to arrays
  ref a : Array<Int,42>               // a reference to an array of 42 integers
  var f : ()->ref Array<Int,42>       // a closure returning a reference to an array
  var b : ref Array<Int,42>           // equivalent to to "ref b : Int[42]"

Rules for copying array elements follow those of instance variables.

``oneof``\ s
============

* Semantics of ``oneof`` elements should follow those of instance
  variables.

__ non-copyable_

Function Parameters
===================

Function parameters can be explicitly declared ``val``, or ``ref``::

  func baz(
      x: Int      // x is passed by-value
    , val y: Int  // just like "y: Int"
    , ref z: Int  // allocate z on the heap

    , q: SomeClass               // passing a reference
    , ref r: SomeClass           // just like "var r: SomeClass"
    , val s: SomeClonableClass) // Passing a copy of the argument

.. Note:: We suggest allowing explicit ``var`` function parameters for
          uniformity.

Semantics of passing arguments to functions follow those of
assignments and initializations: when a ``val`` is involved, the
argument value is copied.

Interaction with `[byref]`
--------------------------

* Joe

Generics
========

As with an array's element type, a generic type parameter can also be bound to
a ``ref`` or a ``val`` type.

   var rv = new Vector<ref Int> // Create a vector of Ints-on-the-heap
   var vv = new Vector<val SomeClass> // Create a vector that owns its SomeClasses

The rules for declarations in terms of ``ref`` or ``val`` types are that
an explicit ``val`` or ``ref`` overrides any ``val``- or ``ref``-ness of the
type parameter, as follows::

   ref x : T // always declares a ref
   val x : T // always declares a val
   var x : T // declares a val iff T is a val

``ref`` and ``val`` can be specified as protocol constraints for type
parameters::

  // Fill an array with independent copies of x
  func fill<T:val>(array:T[], x:T) {
    for i in 0..array.length {
      array[i] = x
    }
  }

Protocols similarly can inherit from ``val`` or ``ref`` constraints, to require
conforming types to have the specified semantics::

  protocol Disposable : ref {
    func dispose()
  }

* Are ref/val constraints actually necessary with argument and variable
  qualifications? Dave thinks not.

.. _non-copyable:

Non-Copyability
===============

A non-``Clonable`` ``class`` is not copyable.  That leaves us with
several options:

1. Make it illegal to declare a non-copyable ``val``
2. Make non-copyable ``val``\ s legal, but not copyable, thus
   infecting their enclosing object with non-copyability.
3. Like #2, but also formalize move semantics.  All ``val``\ s,
   including non-copyable ones, would be explicitly movable.  Generic
   ``var`` parameters would probably be treated as movable but
   non-copyable.

We favor taking all three steps, but it's useful to know that there
are valid stopping points along the way.

Objective-C Interoperability
============================

Clonable Objective-C classes
-----------------------------

In Cocoa, a notion similar to cloneability is captured in the ``NSCopying`` and
``NSMutableCopying`` protocols, and a notion similar to ``val`` instance
variables is captured by the behavior of ``(copy)`` properties. However, there
are some behavioral and semantic differences that need to be taken into account:

* ``NSCopying`` and ``NSMutableCopying`` are entangled with Foundation's
  idiosyncratic management of container mutability.
  ``-[NSMutableThing copy]`` produces a freshly copied immutable ``NSThing``,
  whereas ``-[NSThing copy]`` returns the same object back if the receiver is
  already immutable. ``-[NSMutableThing mutableCopy]`` and
  ``-[NSThing mutableCopy]`` both return a freshly copied ``NSMutableThing``.
* ``(copy)`` properties only affect the behavior of the synthesized setter
  method for the property. The default property getter is unaffected, and since
  there is no implicit ``NSCopying`` or ``NSMutableCopying`` conformance in
  Objective-C, ``-[copy]``-ing the object may have behavior inconsistent with
  the declared behavior of its properties.

* Ask Jordan about other semantic pitfalls.

* Design how to map well-behaved Cocoa copying to Swift cloning and vice-versa.

Objective-C protocols
---------------------

In Objective-C, only classes can conform to protocols, and the ``This`` type
is thus presumed to have references semantics. Swift protocols
imported from Objective-C or declared as ``[objc]`` thus must inherit ``ref``
as a protocol constraint.

Why This Design Improves Swift
==============================

Choose semantics at the point of use.  You might *want* a reference to
a struct, tuple, etc.  You might *want* some class type to be a
component of the value of some value type.  The designer of the type
doesn't know whether you want to use it via a reference; she can only
guess.

Why This Design Beats Rust/C++/etc.
===================================

* We retain the "easy box".

* Types meant to be reference types with inheritance aren't Clonable
  by default.

* By retaining the class vs. struct distinction, we give type authors the
  ability to provide a default semantics for their types and avoid confronting
  their users with a constant ``T*`` vs. ``T`` choice like C/C++.

``structs`` Really Should Have Value Semantics
==============================================

It is *possible* to build a struct with reference semantics. For
example, ::

  struct XPair
  {
     constructor(f : X, s : X) {
         first = f
         second = s
     }
     ref first : X
     ref second : X
  }

However, the results can be surprising::

  val a = XPair(y1, y2)  // I want an independent value, please
  val b = a              // and a copy of that value
  a.first.mutate()       // changes b.first

Getting the ``ref`` out of a ``val`` ``class``
==============================================

* Dave

use a method.

Bikeshed
========

* Dave

* ``var`` is like ``val``
  * What about ``let``?
  * Should we drop ``let`` for ivars?

* ``ref`` is like ``[byref]``.
  * We don't think they can be collapsed--"ref" requires shared ownership and is
    escapable and aliasable, unlike "[byref]".
  * Should we spell ``[byref]`` differently?  I think at a high level
    it means something like "rebind the name to a new value."

* Do we want to consider replacing ``struct`` and/or ``class`` with
  new names such as ``valtype`` and ``reftype``?

* Do we need to name the ``val`` and ``ref`` protocols ``Val`` and ``Ref``?

Commit message:

valref.rst: rewrite section on extracting a ref from a class val
Swift SVN r4424

docs/valref.rst, after:

.. _valref:

=======================
 Values and References
=======================

:Author: Dave Abrahams
:Author: Joe Groff
:Date: 2013-03-15

**Abstract:** We propose a system that offers first-class support for
both value and reference semantics.  By allowing—but not
requiring—(instance) variables, function parameters, and generic
constraints to be declared as ``val`` or ``ref``, we offer users the
ability to nail down semantics to the desired degree without
compromising ease of use.

.. Note::

   We are aware of some issues with naming of these new keywords; to
   avoid chaos we discuss alternative spelling schemes in a section at
   the end of this document.

Introduction
============

* Dave

General Description
===================

The general rule we propose is that most places where you can write
``var`` in today's swift, and also on function parameters, you can
write ``val`` or ``ref`` to request specific semantics.  Writing
``var`` requests the default for a given type.  Non-``class`` types
(``struct``\ s, tuples, arrays, ``oneof``\ s) default to ``val``
semantics, while ``class``\ es default to ``ref`` semantics.  Because
the current specification already describes the default behaviors, we
will restrict ourselves to discussing the new combinations, such as
``struct`` variables declared with ``ref`` and ``class`` variables declared
with ``val``.

Terminology
===========

When we use the term "copy" for non-``class`` types, we are talking
about what traditionally happens on assignment and pass-by-value.
When applied to ``class`` types, "copy" means to call the ``clone()``
method generated due to the user's explicit declaration of conformance
to the ``Clonable`` protocol.

When we refer to variables being "declared ``val``" or "declared
``ref``", we mean to include the case of equivalent declarations using
``var`` that request the default semantics for the type.

Unless otherwise specified, we discuss implementation details such as
"allocated on the heap" as a way of describing operational semantics,
with the understanding that semantics-preserving optimizations are
always allowed.

When we refer to the "value" of a class, we mean the combination of
values of its ``val`` instance variables and the identities of its
``ref`` instance variables.

Variables
=========

Variables can be explicitly declared ``val`` or ``ref``::

    var x: Int  // x is stored by value
    val y: Int  // just like "var y: Int"
    ref z: Int  // z is allocated on the heap.

    var q: SomeClass          // a reference to SomeClass
    ref r: SomeClass          // just like "var r: SomeClass"
    val s: SomeClonableClass // a unique value of SomeClonableClass type

Assignments and initializations involving at least one ``val`` result
in a copy.  Creating a ``ref`` from a ``val`` copies into heap memory::

    ref z2 = x         // z2 is a copy of x's value on the heap
    y = z              // z2's value is copied into y

    ref z2 = z         // z and z2 refer to the same Int value
    ref z3 = z.clone() // z3 refers to a copy of z's value

    val t = r          // Illegal unless SomeClass is Clonable
    ref u = s          // s's value is copied into u
    val v = s          // s's value is copied into v

Standalone Types
================

``val``\ - or ``ref``\ -ness is part of the type.  When the type
appears without a variable name, it can be written this way::

   ref Int                 // an Int on the heap
   val SomeCloneableClass  // a value of SomeCloneableClass type

Therefore, although it is not recommended style, we can also write::

    var y: val Int               // just like "var y: Int"
    var z: ref Int               // z is allocated on the heap.
    var s: val SomeClonableClass // a unique value of type SomeClonableClass

Instance Variables
==================

Instance variables can be explicitly declared ``val`` or ``ref``::

  struct Foo {
      var x: Int  // x is stored by-value
      val y: Int  // just like "var y: Int"
      ref z: Int  // allocate z on the heap

      var q: SomeClass          // q is a reference to SomeClass
      ref r: SomeClass          // just like "var r: SomeClass"
      val s: SomeClonableClass // clone() s when Foo is copied
  }

  class Bar : Clonable {
      var x: Int  // x is stored by-value
      val y: Int  // just like "var y: Int"
      ref z: Int  // allocate z on the heap

      var q: SomeClass          // q is stored by-reference
      ref r: SomeClass          // just like "var r: SomeClass"
      val s: SomeClonableClass // clone() s when Bar is clone()d
  }

When a value is copied, all of its instance variables declared ``val``
(implicitly or explicitly) are copied.  Instance variables declared
``ref`` merely have their reference counts incremented (i.e. the
refrence is copied).  Therefore, when the defaults are in play, the
semantic rules already defined for Swift are preserved.

The new rules are as follows:

* A non-``class`` instance variable declared ``ref`` is allocated on
  the heap and can outlive its enclosing ``struct``.

* A ``class`` instance variable declared ``val`` will be copied when
  its enclosing ``struct`` or ``class`` is copied.  We discuss below__
  what to do when the ``class`` is not ``Clonable``.

Arrays
======

Array elements can be explicitly declared ``val`` or ``ref``::

  var x : Int[42]         // an array of 42 integers
  var y : Int[val 42]     // an array of 42 integers
  var z : Int[ref 42]     // an array of 42 integers-on-the-heap
  var z : Int[ref 2][42]  // an array of 2 references to arrays
  ref a : Int[42]         // a reference to an array of 42 integers

When a reference to an array appears without a variable name, it can
be written using the `usual syntax`__::

  var f : ()->ref Int[42] // a closure returning a reference to an array
  var b : ref Int[42]     // equivalent to to "ref b : Int[42]"

__ `standalone types`_

Presumably there is also some fully-desugared syntax using angle
brackets, that most users will never touch, e.g.::

  var x : Array<Int,42>               // an array of 42 integers
  var y : Array<Int,val 42>           // an array of 42 integers
  var z : Array<Int,ref 42>           // an array of 42 integers-on-the-heap
  var z : Array<ref Array<Int,42>, 2> // an array of 2 references to arrays
  ref a : Array<Int,42>               // a reference to an array of 42 integers
  var f : ()->ref Array<Int,42>       // a closure returning a reference to an array
  var b : ref Array<Int,42>           // equivalent to to "ref b : Int[42]"

Rules for copying array elements follow those of instance variables.

``oneof``\ s
============

* Semantics of ``oneof`` elements should follow those of instance
  variables.

__ non-copyable_

Function Parameters
===================

Function parameters can be explicitly declared ``val``, or ``ref``::

  func baz(
      x: Int      // x is passed by-value
    , val y: Int  // just like "y: Int"
    , ref z: Int  // allocate z on the heap

    , q: SomeClass               // passing a reference
    , ref r: SomeClass           // just like "var r: SomeClass"
    , val s: SomeClonableClass) // Passing a copy of the argument

.. Note:: We suggest allowing explicit ``var`` function parameters for
          uniformity.

Semantics of passing arguments to functions follow those of
assignments and initializations: when a ``val`` is involved, the
argument value is copied.

Interaction with `[byref]`
--------------------------

* Joe

Generics
========

As with an array's element type, a generic type parameter can also be bound to
a ``ref`` or a ``val`` type.

   var rv = new Vector<ref Int> // Create a vector of Ints-on-the-heap
   var vv = new Vector<val SomeClass> // Create a vector that owns its SomeClasses

The rules for declarations in terms of ``ref`` or ``val`` types are that
an explicit ``val`` or ``ref`` overrides any ``val``- or ``ref``-ness of the
type parameter, as follows::

   ref x : T // always declares a ref
   val x : T // always declares a val
   var x : T // declares a val iff T is a val

``ref`` and ``val`` can be specified as protocol constraints for type
parameters::

  // Fill an array with independent copies of x
  func fill<T:val>(array:T[], x:T) {
    for i in 0..array.length {
      array[i] = x
    }
  }

Protocols similarly can inherit from ``val`` or ``ref`` constraints, to require
conforming types to have the specified semantics::

  protocol Disposable : ref {
    func dispose()
  }

* Are ref/val constraints actually necessary with argument and variable
  qualifications? Dave thinks not.

.. _non-copyable:

Non-Copyability
===============

A non-``Clonable`` ``class`` is not copyable.  That leaves us with
several options:

1. Make it illegal to declare a non-copyable ``val``
2. Make non-copyable ``val``\ s legal, but not copyable, thus
   infecting their enclosing object with non-copyability.
3. Like #2, but also formalize move semantics.  All ``val``\ s,
   including non-copyable ones, would be explicitly movable.  Generic
   ``var`` parameters would probably be treated as movable but
   non-copyable.

We favor taking all three steps, but it's useful to know that there
are valid stopping points along the way.

Objective-C Interoperability
============================

Clonable Objective-C classes
-----------------------------

In Cocoa, a notion similar to cloneability is captured in the ``NSCopying`` and
``NSMutableCopying`` protocols, and a notion similar to ``val`` instance
variables is captured by the behavior of ``(copy)`` properties. However, there
are some behavioral and semantic differences that need to be taken into account:

* ``NSCopying`` and ``NSMutableCopying`` are entangled with Foundation's
  idiosyncratic management of container mutability.
  ``-[NSMutableThing copy]`` produces a freshly copied immutable ``NSThing``,
  whereas ``-[NSThing copy]`` returns the same object back if the receiver is
  already immutable. ``-[NSMutableThing mutableCopy]`` and
  ``-[NSThing mutableCopy]`` both return a freshly copied ``NSMutableThing``.
* ``(copy)`` properties only affect the behavior of the synthesized setter
  method for the property. The default property getter is unaffected, and since
  there is no implicit ``NSCopying`` or ``NSMutableCopying`` conformance in
  Objective-C, ``-[copy]``-ing the object may have behavior inconsistent with
  the declared behavior of its properties.

* Ask Jordan about other semantic pitfalls.

* Design how to map well-behaved Cocoa copying to Swift cloning and vice-versa.

Objective-C protocols
---------------------

In Objective-C, only classes can conform to protocols, and the ``This`` type
is thus presumed to have references semantics. Swift protocols
imported from Objective-C or declared as ``[objc]`` thus must inherit ``ref``
as a protocol constraint.

Why This Design Improves Swift
==============================

Choose semantics at the point of use.  You might *want* a reference to
a struct, tuple, etc.  You might *want* some class type to be a
component of the value of some value type.  The designer of the type
doesn't know whether you want to use it via a reference; she can only
guess.

Why This Design Beats Rust/C++/etc.
===================================

* We retain the "easy box".

* Types meant to be reference types with inheritance aren't Clonable
  by default.

* By retaining the class vs. struct distinction, we give type authors the
  ability to provide a default semantics for their types and avoid confronting
  their users with a constant ``T*`` vs. ``T`` choice like C/C++.

``structs`` Really Should Have Value Semantics
==============================================

It is *possible* to build a struct with reference semantics. For
example, ::

  struct XPair
  {
     constructor(f : X, s : X) {
         first = f
         second = s
     }
     ref first : X
     ref second : X
  }

However, the results can be surprising::

  val a = XPair(y1, y2)  // I want an independent value, please
  val b = a              // and a copy of that value
  a.first.mutate()       // changes b.first

If ``XPair`` had been declared a class, ::

  val a = XPair(y1, y2)  // I want an independent value, please

would only compile if ``XPair`` is also ``Cloneable``, thereby
protecting the user's intention to create an independent value from
being thwarted.

Getting the ``ref`` out of a ``class`` instance declared ``val``
================================================================

A ``class`` instance is always accessed through a reference, but when
an instance is declared ``val``, that reference is effectively hidden
behind the ``val`` wrapper.  However, because ``this`` is passed to
``class`` methods as a reference, we can unwrap the underlying ``ref``
as follows::

  val x : SomeClass

  extension SomeClass {
    func get_ref() { return this }
  }

  ref y : x.get_ref()
  y.mutate()          // mutates x


Bikeshed
========

* Dave

* ``var`` is like ``val``
  * What about ``let``?
  * Should we drop ``let`` for ivars?

* ``ref`` is like ``[byref]``.
  * We don't think they can be collapsed--"ref" requires shared ownership and is
    escapable and aliasable, unlike "[byref]".
  * Should we spell ``[byref]`` differently?  I think at a high level
    it means something like "rebind the name to a new value."

* Do we want to consider replacing ``struct`` and/or ``class`` with
  new names such as ``valtype`` and ``reftype``?

* Do we need to name the ``val`` and ``ref`` protocols ``Val`` and ``Ref``?
